copyright wikipedia.org

mark elliot zuckerberg  is an american business magnate, computer programmer, internet entrepreneur, and philanthropist. he cofounded the social media service facebook and its parent company meta platforms , of which he is executive chairman, chief executive officer and controlling shareholder.zuckerberg attended harvard university, where he launched facebook in february  with his roommates eduardo saverin, andrew mccollum, dustin moskovitz and chris hughes. originally launched in only select college campuses, the site expanded rapidly and eventually beyond colleges, reaching one billion users in . zuckerberg took the company public in may  with majority shares. in , at age , he became the worlds youngest selfmade billionaire. he has since used his funds to organize multiple philanthropic endeavors, including the establishment of the chan zuckerberg initiative.

zuckerberg has been listed as one of the most influential people in the world on four occasions in , ,  and  respectively and nominated as a finalist in , , , , , , ,  and . he was named person of the year by time magazine in , the same year when facebook eclipsed more than half a billion users. in december , zuckerberg was ranked tenth on the forbes list of the worlds most powerful people. in the forbes  list of wealthiest americans in , he was ranked eighth with a personal wealth of  billion. as of november , zuckerbergs net worth was estimated at  billion by forbes, making him the seventh richest person in the world. a film depicting zuckerbergs early career, legal troubles and initial success with the site, the social network, was released in  and won multiple academy awards.

zuckerbergs prominence and fast rise in the technology industry has prompted political and legal attention. the founding of facebook involved zuckerberg in multiple lawsuits regarding the creation and ownership of the website as well as issues of user privacy. in , he cofounded the proimmigration lobbying group fwd.us. on april  and , , zuckerberg testified before the united states senate committee on commerce, science, and transportation regarding the usage of personal data by facebook in relation to the facebookcambridge analytica data breach.

mark elliot zuckerberg was born on may , , in  white plains, new york to psychiatrist karen  and dentist edward zuckerberg. he and his three sisters  were raised in a reform jewish household in dobbs ferry, new york. his greatgrandparents were jewish emigrants from austria, germany, and poland. zuckerberg attended high school at ardsley high school before transferring to phillips exeter academy. he was captain of the fencing team.

zuckerberg began using computers and writing software in middle school. in high school, he built a program that allowed all the computers between his house and his fathers dental office to communicate with each other. during zuckerbergs highschool years, he worked to build a music player called the synapse media player. the device used machine learning to learn the users listening habits, which was posted to slashdot and received a rating of  out of  from pc magazine. a new yorker profile said of zuckerberg some kids played computer games. mark created them.

the new yorker noted that by the time zuckerberg began classes at harvard in , he had already achieved a reputation as a programming prodigy. he studied psychology and computer science and belonged to alpha epsilon pi and kirkland house. in his sophomore year, he wrote a program that he called coursematch, which allowed users to make class selection decisions based on the choices of other students and help them form study groups. later, he created a different program he initially called facemash that let students select the bestlooking person from a choice of photos. arie hasit, zuckerbergs roommate at the time, explained

we had books called face books, which included the names and pictures of everyone who lived in the student dorms. at first, he built a site and placed two pictures or pictures of two males and two females. visitors to the site had to choose who was hotter and according to the votes there would be a ranking.

the site went up over a weekend, but by monday morning, the college shut it down, because its popularity had overwhelmed one of harvards network switches preventing students from accessing the internet. in addition, many students complained that their photos were being used without permission. zuckerberg apologized publicly, and the student paper ran articles stating that his site was completely improper.

in january , zuckerberg began writing code for a new website. on february , , zuckerberg launched thefacebook, originally located at thefacebook.com, in partnership with his roommates eduardo saverin, andrew mccollum, dustin moskovitz, and chris hughes. an earlier inspiration for facebook may have come from phillips exeter academy, the prep school from which zuckerberg graduated in . it published its own student directory, the photo address book, which students referred to as the facebook. such photo directories were an important part of the student social experience at many private schools. with them, students were able to list attributes such as their class years, their friends, and their telephone numbers.

six days after the site launched, three harvard seniors, cameron winklevoss, tyler winklevoss, and divya narendra, accused zuckerberg of intentionally misleading them into believing that he would help them build a social network called harvardconnection.com, when he was using their ideas to build a competing product. the three complained to the harvard crimson, and the newspaper began an investigation in response. while zuckerberg tried to convince the editors not to run the story, he also broke into two of the editors email accounts  for which he made use of their private login data logs from thefacebook.following the official launch of the facebook social media platform, the three filed a lawsuit against zuckerberg that resulted in a settlement. the agreed settlement was for . million facebook shares and  million in cash.zuckerbergs facebook started off as just a harvard thing until he decided to spread it to other schools, enlisting the help of roommate and cofounder dustin moskovitz. they began with columbia, new york university, stanford, dartmouth, cornell, university of pennsylvania, brown, and yale.zuckerberg dropped out of harvard in his sophomore year in order to complete the project. zuckerberg, moskovitz and the other cofounders moved to palo alto, california, where they leased a small house that served as an office. over the summer, zuckerberg met peter thiel, who invested in his company. they got their first office in mid. according to zuckerberg, the group planned to return to harvard, but eventually decided to remain in california, where zuckerberg appreciated the mythical place of silicon valley, the center of computer technology in california. they had already turned down offers by major corporations to buy the company. in an interview in , zuckerberg explained his reasoning its not because of the amount of money. for me and my colleagues, the most important thing is that we create an open information flow for people. having media corporations owned by conglomerates is just not an attractive idea to me. the same year, speaking at y combinators startup school course at stanford university, zuckerberg made a controversial assertion that young people are just smarter and that other entrepreneurs should bias towards hiring young people.he restated these goals to wired magazine in  the thing i really care about is the mission, making the world open. earlier, in april , zuckerberg had sought the advice of former netscape cfo peter currie regarding financing strategies for facebook. on july , , zuckerberg reported that facebook had reached the millionuser mark. when asked whether facebook could earn more income from advertising as a result of its phenomenal growth, he explained

i guess we could ... if you look at how much of our page is taken up with ads compared to the average search query. the average for us is a little less than  percent of the pages and the average for search is about  percent taken up with ads ... thats the simplest thing we could do. but we arent like that. we make enough money. right, i mean, we are keeping things running; we are growing at the rate we want to.

in , steven levy, who wrote the  book hackers heroes of the computer revolution, wrote that zuckerberg clearly thinks of himself as a hacker. zuckerberg said that its ok to break things to make them better. facebook instituted hackathons held every six to eight weeks where participants would have one night to conceive of and complete a project. the company provided music, food, and beer at the hackathons, and many facebook staff members, including zuckerberg, regularly attended. the idea is that you can build something really good in a night, zuckerberg told levy. and thats part of the personality of facebook now ... its definitely very core to my personality.in , zuckerberg was added to mit technology reviews tr list as one of the top  innovators in the world under the age of . vanity fair magazine named zuckerberg number  on its  list of the top  most influential people of the information age. zuckerberg ranked number  on the vanity fair  list in . in , zuckerberg was chosen as number  in new statesmans annual survey of the worlds  most influential figures.in a  interview with pbs shortly after the death of steve jobs, zuckerberg said that jobs had advised him on how to create a management team at facebook that was focused on building as high quality and good things as you are.

on october , , zuckerberg met with then russian prime minister dmitry medvedev in moscow to stimulate social media innovation in russia and to boost facebooks position in the russian market. russias communications minister tweeted that prime minister dmitry medvedev urged the social media giants founder to abandon plans to lure away russian programmers and instead consider opening a research center in moscow. in , facebook had roughly  million users in russia, while domestic clone vk had around  million. rebecca van dyck, facebooks head of consumer marketing, said that  million american facebook users were exposed to the first day of the home promotional campaign on april , .on august , , the washington post reported that zuckerbergs facebook profile was hacked by an unemployed web developer.at the  techcrunch disrupt conference, held in september, zuckerberg stated that he was working towards registering the  billion people who were not connected to the internet as of the conference on facebook. zuckerberg then explained that this is intertwined with the aim of the internet.org project, whereby facebook, with the support of other technology companies, seeks to increase the number of people connected to the internet.zuckerberg was the keynote speaker at the  mobile world congress , held in barcelona, spain, in march , which was attended by , delegates. various media sources highlighted the connection between facebooks focus on mobile technology and zuckerbergs speech, stating that mobile represents the future of the company. zuckerbergs speech expands upon the goal that he raised at the techcrunch conference in september , whereby he is working towards expanding internet coverage into developing countries.alongside other american technology figures like jeff bezos and tim cook, zuckerberg hosted visiting chinese politician lu wei, known as the internet czar for his influence in the enforcement of chinas online policy, at facebooks headquarters on december , . the meeting occurred after zuckerberg participated in a qa session at tsinghua university in beijing, china, on october , , where he conversed in mandarin chinese; although facebook is banned in china, zuckerberg is highly regarded among the people and was at the university to help fuel the nations burgeoning entrepreneur sector.zuckerberg fielded questions during a live qa session at the companys headquarters in menlo park on december , . the founder and ceo explained that he does not believe facebook is a waste of time, because it facilitates social engagement, and participating in a public session was so that he could learn how to better serve the community.zuckerberg receives a onedollar salary as ceo of facebook. in june , business insider named zuckerberg one of the top  business visionaries creating value for the world along with elon musk and sal khan, due to the fact that he and his wife pledged to give away  of their wealththen estimated at . billion.on may , , at harvards th commencement day, zuckerberg, after giving a commencement speech, received an honorary degree from harvard.in january , zuckerberg laid plans to integrate an endtoend encrypted system for three major social media platforms, including facebook, instagram and whatsapp. on august , , facebook integrated the chat systems for instagram and messenger on both ios and android devices. the update encouraged crosscommunication between instagram and facebook users.

a month after zuckerberg launched facebook in february , ihub, another campusonly service, created by wayne chang and focusing on peertopeer file sharing, was launched. at the time, both ihub and facebook were gaining the attention of the press and growing rapidly in users and publicity. in august , zuckerberg, andrew mccollum, adam dangelo, and sean parker launched a competing peertopeer file sharing service called wirehog, a precursor to facebook platform applications, which was launched in .in , zuckerberg launched internet.org, which he described as an initiative to provide internet access to the five billion people without it as of the launch date. the project faced significant opposition in india, where activists said its limited internet ran counter to the principle of net neutrality; zuckerberg responded by saying that a limited internet was better than no internet. internet.org was shut down in india in february , although zuckerberg later met with indian prime minister narendra modi to discuss further possibilities.zuckerberg is a board member of the solar sail spacecraft development project breakthrough starshot, which he cofounded with yuri milner and stephen hawking in .

harvard students cameron winklevoss, tyler winklevoss, and divya narendra accused zuckerberg of intentionally making them believe he would help them build a social network called harvardconnection.com . they filed a lawsuit in ; it was dismissed on a technicality on march , . it was refiled soon thereafter in a federal court in boston. facebook countersued in regards to social butterfly, a project put out by the winklevoss chang group, an alleged partnership between connectu and ihub. on june , , the case settled and facebook agreed to transfer over . million common shares and pay  million in cash.in november , confidential court documents were posted on the website of , a magazine that catered to harvard alumni. they included zuckerbergs social security number, his parents home address, and his girlfriends address. though facebook filed to have the documents removed, the judge ruled in favor of .

in , facebook cofounder eduardo saverin filed a lawsuit against zuckerberg and facebook, alleging that zuckerberg had illegally spent saverins money on personal expenses. the lawsuit was settled out of court and though terms of the settlement were sealed, the company affirmed saverins title as cofounder of facebook, and saverin agreed to stop talking to the press.

in june , then pakistani deputy attorney general muhammad azhar sidiqque launched a criminal investigation into zuckerberg and facebook cofounders dustin moskovitz and chris hughes after a draw muhammad contest was hosted on facebook. the investigation also named the anonymous german woman who created the contest. sidiqque asked the countrys police to contact interpol to have zuckerberg and the three others arrested for blasphemy. on may , , facebooks website was temporarily blocked in pakistan until facebook removed the contest from its website at the end of may. sidiqque also asked its un representative to raise the issue with the united nations general assembly.

in june , paul ceglia, the owner of a wood pellet fuel company in allegany county, upstate new york, filed suit against zuckerberg, claiming  percent ownership of facebook and seeking monetary damages. according to ceglia, he and zuckerberg signed a contract on april , , that an initial fee of , entitled ceglia to  of the websites revenue, as well as an additional  interest in the business per day after january , , until website completion. zuckerberg was developing other projects at the time, among which was facemash, the predecessor to facebook, but did not register the domain name thefacebook.com until january , . the facebook management dismissed the lawsuit as completely frivolous. facebook spokesman barry schnitt told a reporter that ceglias counsel had unsuccessfully sought an outofcourt settlement.on october , , federal authorities arrested ceglia, charging him with mail and wire fraud and of tampering with, destroying and fabricating evidence in a scheme to defraud the facebook founder of billions of dollars. ceglia is accused of fabricating emails to make it appear that he and zuckerberg discussed details about an early version of facebook, although after examining their emails, investigators found there was no mention of facebook in them. some law firms withdrew from the case before it was initiated and others after ceglias arrest.

in january , zuckerberg filed eight quiet title and partition lawsuits against hundreds of native hawaiians to claim small tracts of land which they owned. this land is contained within the  acres of land in the hawaiian island of kauai that zuckerberg had purchased in . university of hawaii law professor kapua sproat stated that zuckerbergs lawsuits was the face of neocolonialism. zuckerberg responded to criticisms in a facebook post, stating that the lawsuits were a good faith effort to pay the partial owners of the land their fair share. when he learned that hawaiian land ownership law differs from that of the other  states, he dropped the lawsuits. zuckerberg stated that he regretted not taking the time to understand the process and its history before moving ahead.

on april  and , , zuckerberg testified before the united states senate committee on commerce, science, and transportation regarding the usage of personal data by facebook in relation to the facebookcambridge analytica data breach. he called the whole affair a breach of trust between aleksandr kogan, cambridge analytica, and facebook. zuckerberg refused requests to appear to give evidence on the matter to a parliamentary committee in the united kingdom.on october , , the us senate commerce committee unanimously voted to issue subpoenas to the ceos of three top tech firms, including zuckerberg, googles sundar pichai and twitters jack dorsey. the subpoenas aimed to force the ceos to testify about the legal immunity the law affords tech platforms under section  of the communications act of . us republicans argued that the law unduly protected social media companies against allegations of anticonservative censorship.in march , it was announced that zuckerberg would testify before congress on march , where he would be questioned about the role that facebook played in the january , , attack on the us capitol building.

court documents claim that mark zuckerberg personally turned down metas suggestions to enhance the mental health of teenagers.

mark zuckerberg, the ceo of meta, has reportedly consistently impeded efforts aimed at enhancing the wellbeing of teens on facebook and instagram. internal communications, now revealed as part of an ongoing lawsuit, suggest that zuckerberg directly overruled senior executives, including instagram ceo adam mosseri and president of global affairs nick clegg. these documents, unveiled in a lawsuit initiated by massachusetts, illustrate how zuckerberg resisted calls to better protect over  million teens using instagram in the united states, emphasizing his significant influence on metas decisions impacting billions of users. the communications also illuminate occasional tensions between zuckerberg and other meta officials advocating for improved user wellbeing.

a movie based on zuckerberg and the founding years of facebook, the social network, was released on october , , starring jesse eisenberg as zuckerberg. after zuckerberg was told about the film, he responded, i just wished that nobody made a movie of me while i was still alive. also, after the films script was leaked on the internet and it was apparent that the film would not portray zuckerberg in a wholly positive light, he stated that he wanted to establish himself as a good guy. the film is based on the book the accidental billionaires by ben mezrich, which the books publicist once described as big juicy fun rather than reportage. the films screenwriter aaron sorkin told new york magazine, i dont want my fidelity to be the truth; i want it to be storytelling, adding, what is the big deal about accuracy purely for accuracys sake, and can we not have the true be the enemy of the goodupon winning the golden globe award for best picture on january , , producer scott rudin thanked facebook and zuckerberg for his willingness to allow us to use his life and work as a metaphor through which to tell a story about communication and the way we relate to each other. sorkin, who won for best screenplay, retracted some of the impressions given in his script

i wanted to say to mark zuckerberg tonight, if youre watching, rooney maras character makes a prediction at the beginning of the movie. she was wrong. you turned out to be a great entrepreneur, a visionary, and an incredible altruist.on january , , zuckerberg made a surprise guest appearance on saturday night live, which was hosted by jesse eisenberg. they both said it was the first time they had met. eisenberg asked zuckerberg, who had been critical of his portrayal by the film, what he thought of the movie. zuckerberg replied, it was interesting. in a subsequent interview about their meeting, eisenberg explained that he was nervous to meet him, because i had spent now, a year and a half thinking about him ... he added, mark has been so gracious about something thats really so uncomfortable ... the fact that he would do snl and make fun of the situation is so sweet and so generous. its the best possible way to handle something that, i think, could otherwise be very uncomfortable.

according to david kirkpatrick, former technology editor at fortune magazine and author of the facebook effect the inside story of the company that is connecting the world, , the film is only  true ... he is not snide and sarcastic in a cruel way, the way zuckerberg is played in the movie. he says that a lot of the factual incidents are accurate, but many are distorted and the overall impression is false, and concludes that primarily his motivations were to try and come up with a new way to share information on the internet.although the film portrayed zuckerbergs creation of facebook in order to elevate his stature after not getting into any of the elite final clubs at harvard, zuckerberg stated that he had no interest in joining the clubs. kirkpatrick agreed that the impression implied by the film is false. karel baloun, a former senior engineer at facebook, noted that the image of zuckerberg as a socially inept nerd is overstated ... it is fiction ... he likewise dismissed the films assertion that he would deliberately betray a friend.

zuckerberg voiced himself on an episode of the simpsons titled loana lisa, which first aired on october , . in the episode, lisa simpson and her friend nelson encounter zuckerberg at an entrepreneurs convention. zuckerberg tells lisa that she does not need to graduate from college to be wildly successful, referencing bill gates and richard branson as examples.on october , , saturday night live lampooned zuckerberg and facebook. andy samberg portrayed the role of zuckerberg. zuckerberg himself was reported to have been amused i thought this was funny.stephen colbert awarded a medal of fear to zuckerberg at the rally to restore sanity and/or fear on october , , because he values his privacy much more than he values yours.zuckerberg appeared in the climax of documentary film terms and conditions may apply.zuckerberg was parodied in the october  south park episode franchise prequel.

zuckerberg founded the startup education foundation. on september , , it was reported that he had donated  million to newark public schools, the public school system of newark, new jersey. critics noted the timing of the donation as being close to the release of the social network, which painted a somewhat negative portrait of zuckerberg. zuckerberg responded to the criticism, saying, the thing that i was most sensitive about with the movie timing was, i didnt want the press about the social network movie to get conflated with the newark project. i was thinking about doing this anonymously just so that the two things could be kept separate. newark mayor cory booker stated that he and new jersey governor chris christie had to convince zuckerbergs team not to make the donation anonymously. the money was largely wasted, according to journalist dale russakoff.in , zuckerberg, bill gates, and investor warren buffett signed the giving pledge, in which they said they would donate to charity at least half of their wealth over the course of time, and invited others among the wealthy to donate  percent or more of their wealth to charity. in december , zuckerberg and his wife priscilla chan said that over the course of their lives they would give the majority of their wealth to advancing human potential and promoting equality in the spirit of the giving pledge.on december , , zuckerberg announced a donation of  million facebook shares to the silicon valley community foundation, to be executed by the end of the monthbased on facebooks valuation as of then, the shares totaled  million in value. on december , , the donation was recognized as the largest charitable gift on public record for . the chronicle of philanthropy placed zuckerberg and his wife at the top of the magazines annual list of  most generous americans for , having donated roughly  billion to charity.in october , zuckerberg and his wife donated us million to combat the ebola virus disease, specifically the west african ebola virus epidemic.on december , , zuckerberg and chan pledged to transfer  of their facebook shares, then valued at us billion, to the chan zuckerberg initiative. the funds would not be transferred immediately, but over the course of their lives. instead of forming a charitable corporation to donate the value of the stock to, as bill gates, warren buffett, larry page, sergey brin and other billionaires have done, zuckerberg and chan chose to use the structure of a limited liability company . some journalists and academics have said the chan zuckerberg initiative conducts philanthrocapitalism.in , the chan zuckerberg initiative gave  million to create the taxexempt charity chan zuckerberg biohub, a collaborative research space in san franciscos mission bay district near the university of california, san francisco, with the intent to foster interaction and collaboration between scientists at ucsf, university of california, berkeley, and stanford university. intellectual property generated would be jointly owned by biohub and the discoverers home institution. unlike foundations like the bill and melinda gates foundation which open up all research funded to unrestricted access and reuse by the public, biohub retained the right to commercialize any research it funds. inventors will have the option of making their discoveries opensource, with permission from biohub. to increase access to scientific research and promote open science, cz biohub requires its investigators and staff scientists to publish submitted manuscripts and related data on preprints servers like biorxiv.amidst the covid pandemic, zuckerberg donated  million to a bill and melinda gates foundationbacked accelerator that is searching for treatments for the disease. he also announced  million in grants to support local journalism that was impacted by the pandemic and  million in advertisement purchases in local newspapers by facebook, inc., where facebook would market itself.

in , zuckerberg registered to vote in westchester county, new york, where he grew up, but did not cast a ballot until november . then santa clara county registrar of voters spokeswoman, elma rosas, told bloomberg that zuckerberg is listed as no preference on voter rolls, and he voted in at least two of the past three general elections, in  and .zuckerberg has never revealed his own political affiliation or voting history some news outlets consider him to be a conservative, while others consider him liberal.on february , , zuckerberg hosted his first ever fundraising event for then new jersey governor chris christie. zuckerbergs particular interest on this occasion was education reform, and christies education reform work focused on teachers unions and the expansion of charter schools. later that year, zuckerberg hosted a campaign fundraiser for then newark mayor cory booker, who was running in the  new jersey special senate election. in september , with the support of governor chris christie, booker obtained a us million pledge from zuckerberg to newark public schools. in december , zuckerberg donated  million shares to the silicon valley community foundation, a community organization that includes education in its list of grantmaking areas.

on april , , zuckerberg led the launch of a  lobbying group called fwd.us. the founders and contributors to the group were primarily silicon valley entrepreneurs and investors, and its president was joe green, a close friend of zuckerberg. the goals of the group include immigration reform, improving the state of education in the united states, and enabling more technological breakthroughs that benefit the public, yet it has also been criticized for financing ads advocating a variety of oil and gas development initiatives, including drilling in the arctic national wildlife refuge and the keystone xl pipeline. in , numerous liberal and progressive groups, such as the league of conservation voters, moveon.org, the sierra club, democracy for america, credo, daily kos, .org, and presente and progressives united agreed to either pull their facebook ad buys or not buy facebook ads for at least two weeks, in protest of zuckerberg ads funded by fwd.us that were in support of oil drilling and the keystone xl pipeline, and in opposition to obamacare among republican united states senators who back immigration reform.a media report on june , , revealed that zuckerberg actively engaged with facebook users on his own profile page after the online publication of a fwd.us video. in response to a claim that the fwd.us organization is just about tech wanting to hire more people, the internet entrepreneur replied the bigger problem were trying to address is ensuring the  million undocumented folks living in this country now and similar folks in the future are treated fairly.in june , zuckerberg joined facebook employees in a company float as part of the annual san francisco lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender pride celebration. the company first participated in the event in , with  employees, and this number increased to  for the  march. the  pride celebration was especially significant, as it followed a u.s. supreme court ruling that deemed the defense of marriage act  unconstitutional.

when questioned about the mid prism scandal at the techcrunch disrupt conference in september , zuckerberg stated that the u.s. government blew it. he further explained that the government performed poorly in regard to the protection of the freedoms of its citizens, the economy, and companies.zuckerberg placed a statement on his facebook wall on december , , which said that he wants to add my voice in support of muslims in our community and around the world in response to the aftermath of the november  paris attacks and the  san bernardino attack. the statement also said that muslims are always welcome on facebook, and that his position was a result of the fact that as a jew, my parents taught me that we must stand up against attacks on all communities.on february , , zuckerberg sent out a companywide internal memo to employees formally rebuking employees who had crossed out handwritten black lives matter phrases on the company walls and had written all lives matter in their place. facebook allows employees to freewrite thoughts and phrases on company walls. the memo was then leaked by several employees. as zuckerberg had previously condemned this practice at previous company meetings, and other similar requests had been issued by other leaders at facebook, zuckerberg wrote in the memo that he would now consider this overwriting practice not only disrespectful, but malicious as well. according to zuckerbergs memo, black lives matter doesnt mean other lives dont  its simply asking that the black community also achieves the justice they deserve. the memo also noted that the act of crossing something out in itself, means silencing speech, or that one persons speech is more important than anothers. zuckerberg also said in the memo that he would be launching investigations into the incidents. new yorks daily news interviewed facebook employees who commented anonymously that, zuckerberg was genuinely angry about the incident and it really encouraged staff that zuckerberg showed a clear understanding of why the phrase black lives matter must exist, as well as why writing through it is a form of harassment and erasure.in january , zuckerberg criticized donald trumps executive order to severely limit immigrants and refugees from some countries.zuckerberg funded a statelevel ballot initiative for the  general election that would raise taxes by altering californias proposition  to require the tax assessment of commercial and industrial properties in the state at market rate.

zuckerberg met his future wife, fellow harvard student priscilla chan, at a frat party during his sophomore year there. they began dating in . in september , chan, who was by then a medical student at the university of california, san francisco, moved into zuckerbergs rented house in palo alto, california. on may , , they married in the grounds of his mansion in an event that also celebrated her graduation from medical school. on july , , zuckerberg revealed they were expecting a baby girl and that chan had previously experienced three miscarriages. their daughter, maxima chan zuckerberg, was born on december , . they announced in a chinese new year video that their daughters chinese name is chen mingyu . their second daughter, august, was born in august . zuckerberg and his wife welcomed their third daughter aurelia on march , , and announced the news across his social media pages.

the couple also have a puli dog named beast, who has over two million followers on facebook.

raised as a reform jew, zuckerberg later identified as an atheist. however, he said in  that i went through a period where i questioned things, but now i believe religion is very important.

in , zuckerberg and his wife began a nationwide tour to visit every state in the union and learn more about a sliver of the nearly two billion people who regularly use the social network. he met with farmers and business owners, and spoke at mother emanuel, where a shooting took place in .in an august  appearance on the joe rogan experience, zuckerberg said one of his biggest regrets was competing on the fencing team in high school instead of wrestling. motherboard implicitly criticized this by comparing it to another potential regret facebooks enabling genocide in myanmar because it did not bother to hire moderators who speak burmese, an incident for which zuckerberg apologized at the time. in the same interview, he also said he regretted that facebook had throttled posts about the hunter biden laptop controversy.in , zuckerberg took up training in both mixed martial arts  and brazilian jiujitsu , and has been open about his love for the two sports. he competed in a bjj tournament on may , , and won both a silver and gold medal in gi and no gi, competing at white belt. on july , , zuckerberg was promoted to blue belt in brazilian jiujitsu by dave camarillo. four months later, zuckerberg announced that he was preparing to make his mma debut but had suffered an anterior cruciate ligament injury in training that required surgery and had delayed this.

the academy awards, mainly known as the oscars, are awards for artistic and technical merit for the film industry. they are presented annually by the academy of motion picture arts and sciences located in beverly hills, california, united states, in recognition of excellence in cinematic achievements as assessed by the academys voting membership. the academy awards are regarded by many as the most prestigious, significant awards in the entertainment industry in the united states and worldwide. the oscar statuette depicts a knight rendered in the art deco style.the major award categories are presented during a live televised hollywood ceremony that is typically held in february or march. it is the oldest worldwide entertainment awards ceremony. the st academy awards were held in , the second ceremony in  was the first one broadcast by radio, and the  ceremony was the first one televised. it is also the oldest of the four major annual american entertainment awards; its equivalents  the emmy awards for television, the tony awards for theater, and the grammy awards for music  are modeled after the academy awards.

the first academy awards presentation was held on may , , at a private dinner function at the hollywood roosevelt hotel with an audience of about  people.the postawards party was held at the mayfair hotel. the cost of guest tickets for that nights ceremony was  . fifteen statuettes were awarded, honoring artists, directors and other participants in the filmmaking industry of the time, for their works during the  period. the ceremony ran for  minutes.

for this first ceremony, winners were announced to the media three months earlier. for the second ceremony in , and the rest of the first decade, the results were given to newspapers for publication at  pm on the night of the awards. in , the los angeles times announced the winners before the ceremony began; as a result, the following year the academy started using a sealed envelope to reveal the names of the winners.the term oscar is a registered trademark of the ampas; however, in the italian language, it is used generically to refer to any award or award ceremony, regardless of which field.

the first best actor awarded was emil jannings, for his performances in the last command and the way of all flesh. he had to return to europe before the ceremony, so the academy agreed to give him the prize earlier; this made him the first academy award winner in history. at that time, winners were recognized for the entirety of their work done in a certain category during the qualifying period; for example, jannings received the award for two movies in which he starred during that period, and janet gaynor later won a single oscar for performances in three films. with the fourth ceremony, however, the system changed, and professionals were honored for a specific performance in a single film. for the first six ceremonies, the eligibility period spanned two calendar years.at the th ceremony, held in , the best foreign language film category, now known as best international feature film, was introduced. until then, foreignlanguage films had been honored with the special achievement award.

perhaps the most widely seen streaker in history was yearold robert opel, who streaked across the stage of the dorothy chandler pavilion in los angeles flashing a peace sign on national us television at the th academy awards in . bemused host david niven quipped, isnt it fascinating to think that probably the only laugh that man will ever get in his life is by stripping off and showing his shortcomings later, evidence arose suggesting that opels appearance was facilitated as a publicity stunt by the shows producer jack haley jr.

robert metzler, the shows business manager, believed that the incident had been planned in some way; during the dress rehearsal niven had asked metzlers wife to borrow a pen so he could write down the famous line, which was thus not the adlib it appeared to be.the th academy awards, held in , presented the first academy award for best animated feature.from  to  and since , all academy awards ceremonies have ended with the academy award for best picture. for , this tradition was broken as the ceremony ended with the academy award for best actor.

traditionally, the previous years winner for best actor and best supporting actor present the awards for best actress and best supporting actress, while the previous years winner for best actress and best supporting actress presents the awards for best actor and best supporting actor.

on february , , parasite became the first foreignlanguage film to win best picture at the award ceremony of nd academy awards.tom hanks announced, at the  oscar ceremony, the opening of the academy museum of motion pictures on december , . the museum development started in  under kerry brougher, but is now led by bill kramer. the industrycurated exhibits are geared toward the history of motion pictures and the art  science of film making, exhibiting trailblazing directors, actors, filmmakers, sound editors and more, and the museum houses famous artifacts from acclaimed movies such as dorothys ruby red slippers from the wizard of oz.

the rd academy awards ceremony, honoring the best films of  and early , was held on april , , after it was postponed from its original february , , schedule due to the impact of the covid pandemic on cinema. as with the two previous ceremonies, there was no host. the ceremony was broadcast on abc. it took place at the dolby theatre in los angeles, california for the th consecutive year, along with satellite location taking place at the union station also in los angeles. because of the virus impact on films and tv industries, academy president david rubin and ceo dawn hudson announced that for the  oscar ceremony, streaming movies with a previously planned theatrical release were eligible. the theatrical requirement was reinstated starting with the th academy awards.

the best known award is the academy award of merit, more popularly known as the oscar statuette. made of goldplated bronze on a black metal base, it is . in  tall, weighs . lb , and depicts a knight rendered in art deco style holding a sword standing on a reel of film with five spokes. the five spokes represent the original branches of the academy actors, writers, directors, producers, and technicians.

sculptor george stanley  sculpted cedric gibbons design. the statuettes presented at the initial ceremonies were goldplated solid bronze. within a few years, the bronze was abandoned in favor of britannia metal, a pewterlike alloy which is then plated in copper, nickel silver, and finally, karat gold. due to a metal shortage during world war ii, oscars were made of painted plaster for three years. following the war, the academy invited recipients to redeem the plaster figures for goldplated metal ones. the only addition to the oscar since it was created is a minor streamlining of the base. the original oscar mold was cast in  at the c.w. shumway  sons foundry in batavia, illinois, which also contributed to casting the molds for the vince lombardi trophy and emmy award statuettes. from  to , approximately  oscars in a tin alloy with gold plating were made each year in chicago by illinois manufacturer r.s. owens  company. it would take between three and four weeks to manufacture  statuettes. in , the academy returned to bronze as the core metal of the statuettes, handing manufacturing duties to walden, new yorkbased polich tallix fine art foundry, now owned and operated by uap urban art projects. while based on a digital scan of an original  oscar, the statuettes retain their modernera dimensions and black pedestal. cast in liquid bronze from dprinted ceramic molds and polished, they are then electroplated in karat gold by brooklyn, new yorkbased epner technology. the time required to produce  such statuettes is roughly three months. r.s. owens is expected to continue producing other awards for the academy and service existing oscars that need replating.

the origin of the nickname of the trophy has been disputed as multiple people have taken credit for naming the trophy oscar.

bette davis, in her  autobiography, claimed she named it in  after her first husband, harmon oscar nelson, of whom the statues rear end reminded her. but the term had been in use at least two years before, and in a  biography written by whitney stine with commentary from davis, davis wrote i relinquish once and for all any claim that i was the one  so, academy of motion picture arts and sciences, the honor is all yours.margaret herrick, librarian and president of the academy, may have said she named it after her supposed uncle oscar in . the only corroboration was a  clipping from the los angeles examiner, in which herrick told a story of her and her husband joking with each other using the phrase, hows your uncle oscar.columnist sidney skolsky wrote in his  memoir that he came up with the term in  under pressure for a deadline, mocking vaudeville comedians who asked will you have a cigar, oscar the academy credits skolsky with the first confirmed newspaper reference to oscar in his column on march , , which was written about that years th academy awards. but in the newspaper clipping that skolsky referred to, he wrote that these statues are called oscars, meaning that the name was already in use.bruce davis, a former executive director of the academy, credits eleanore lilleberg, a secretary at the academy when the award was first introduced, for the nickname, as she had been in charge of preceremony handling of the awards. davis credits lilleberg because he found in an autobiography of einar lilleberg, eleanores brother, that einar had referenced a norwegian army veteran named oscar that the two knew in chicago, whom einar described as having always stood straight and tall. he asserts credit should almost certainly belong to lilleberg.

to prevent information identifying the oscar winners from leaking ahead of the ceremony, oscar statuettes presented at the ceremony have blank baseplates. until , winners returned their statuettes to the academy and had to wait several weeks to have their names inscribed on their respective oscars. since , winners have had the option of having engraved nameplates applied to their statuettes at an inscriptionprocessing station at the governors ball, a party held immediately after the oscar ceremony. the r.s. owens company has engraved nameplates made before the ceremony, bearing the name of every potential winner. the nameplates for the nonwinning nominees are later recycled.

prior to , oscar statuettes were  the property of the recipient. since then the statuettes have been legally encumbered by the requirement that the statuette be first offered for sale back to the academy for us. if a winner refuses to agree to this stipulation, then the academy keeps the statuette. academy awards predating this agreement have been sold in public auctions and private deals for sixfigure sums.in , michael todds grandson tried to sell todds best picture oscar for his  production of around the world in  days to a movie prop collector. the academy earned enforcement of its statuette contract by gaining a permanent injunction against the sale.

in , harold russell consigned his  oscar for best supporting actor for the best years of our lives to auction to raise money for his wifes medical expenses. though his decision caused controversy, the first oscar ever to be sold passed to a private collector on august ,  for , . russell defended his action, saying, i dont know why anybody would be critical. my wifes health is much more important than sentimental reasons. the movie will be here, even if oscar isnt.in december , orson welles  oscar for citizen kane  was put up for auction, after his heirs won a  court decision contending that welles did not sign any agreement to return the statue to the academy. on december , , it sold in an online auction for us, .some buyers have subsequently returned the statuettes to the academy, which keeps them in its treasury.

in addition to the academy award of merit , there are nine honorary  awards presented by the academy from time to time 

governors awards

the academy honorary award  ;

the irving g. thalberg memorial award  ;

the jean hersholt humanitarian award  ;

the academy scientific and technical awards

academy award of merit  ;

scientific and engineering award ;

technical achievement award  ;

the john a. bonner medal of commendation  ;

the gordon e. sawyer award ; and

the academy student academy awards .the academy also awards nicholl fellowships in screenwriting.

from  to , the academy award nomination results were announced to the public in midjanuary. prior to that, the results were announced in early february. in , the nominees were announced in march. in , the nominees were announced in early february for the first time since .

the academy of motion picture arts and sciences , a professional honorary organization, maintains a voting membership of over , as of .academy membership is divided into different branches, with each representing a different discipline in film production. actors constitute the largest voting bloc, numbering , members  of the academys composition. votes have been certified by the auditing firm pricewaterhousecoopers  since the th academy awards in . the firm mails the ballots of eligible nominees to members of the academy in december to reflect the previous eligible year with a due date sometime in january of the next year, then tabulates the votes in a process that takes thousands of hours.all ampas members must be invited to join by the board of governors, on behalf of academy branch executive committees. membership eligibility may be achieved by a competitive nomination or a member may submit a name based on other significant contributions to the field of motion pictures.

new membership proposals are considered annually. the academy does not publicly disclose its membership, although as recently as  press releases have announced the names of those who have been invited to join. the  release also stated that it has just under , voting members. while the membership had been growing, stricter policies have kept its size steady since then.in , the results of a study conducted by the los angeles times were published describing the demographic breakdown of approximately  of ampas voting membership. of the , active voters confirmed,  were caucasian,  were male, and  were found to be over the age of .  of voting members are former nominees  and winners .in may , the academy sent a letter advising its , or so voting members that an online system for oscar voting would be implemented in .

according to rules  and  of the official academy awards rules, a film must open in the previous calendar year, from midnight at the start of january  to midnight at the end of december , in los angeles county, california, and play for seven consecutive days, to qualify . additionally, the film must be shown at least three times on each day of its qualifying run, with at least one of the daily showings starting between  pm and  pm local time.for example, the  best picture winner, the hurt locker, was originally first released in , but did not qualify for the  awards, as it did not play its oscarqualifying run in los angeles until mid, thus qualifying for the  awards. foreign films must include english subtitles, and each country can submit only one film for consideration in the international feature film category per year.rule  states that a film must be featurelength, defined as a minimum of  minutes, except for shortsubject awards, and it must exist either on a  mm or  mm film print or in  frame/s or  frame/s progressive scan digital cinema format with a minimum projector resolution of  by  pixels. since the th academy awards, presented in , multipart and limited series have been ineligible for the best documentary feature award. this followed the win of o.j. made in america, an eighthour presentation that was screened in a limited release before being broadcast in five parts on abc and espn, in that category in . the academys announcement of the new rule made no direct mention of that film.the best international feature film award does not require a u.s. release. it requires the film to be submitted as its countrys official selection.

the best documentary feature award requires either weeklong releases in both los angeles county and any of the five boroughs of new york city during the previous calendar year, or a qualifying award at a competitive film festival from the documentary feature qualifying festival list , or submission in the international feature film category as its countrys official selection. the qualifying theatrical runs must meet the same requirements as those for nondocumentary films regarding numbers and times of screenings. additionally, a film must have been reviewed by a critic from the new york times, time out new york, the los angeles times, or la weekly.producers must submit an official screen credits online form before the deadline; in case it is not submitted by the defined deadline, the film will be ineligible for academy awards in any year. the form includes the production credits for all related categories. then, each form is checked and put in a reminder list of eligible releases.

awards in short film categories  have noticeably different eligibility rules from most other competitive awards. first, the qualifying period for release does not coincide with a calendar year, instead covering one year starting on october , and ending on september  of the calendar year before the ceremony. second, there are multiple methods of qualification. the main method is a weeklong theatrical release in either new york city or los angeles county during the eligibility period. films also can qualify by winning specified awards at one of several competitive film festivals designated by the academy, also without regard to prior public distribution. finally, a film that is selected as a gold, silver, or bronze medal winner in an appropriate category of the immediately previous student academy awards is also eligible . the requirements for the qualifying theatrical run are also different from those for other awards. only one screening per day is required. for the documentary award, the screening must start between noon and  pm local time; for other awards, no specific start time is required, but the film must appear in regular theater listings with dates and screening times.

in late december, ballots, and copies of the reminder list of eligible releases are mailed to around , active members. for most categories, members from each of the branches vote to determine the nominees only in their respective categories . in the special case of best picture, all voting members are eligible to select the nominees. in all major categories, a variant of the single transferable vote is used, with each member casting a ballot with up to five nominees  ranked preferentially. in certain categories, including international feature film, documentary and animated feature, nominees are selected by special screening committees made up of members from all branches.

in most categories, the winner is selected from among the nominees by plurality voting of all members. since , the best picture winner has been chosen by instant runoff voting. since , reweighted range voting has been used to select the nominees for the best visual effects.film companies will spend as much as several million dollars on marketing to awards voters for a movie in the running for best picture, in attempts to improve chances of receiving oscars and other movie awards conferred in oscar season. the academy enforces rules to limit overt campaigning by its members to try to eliminate excesses and prevent the process from becoming undignified. it has an awards czar on staff who advises members on allowed practices and levies penalties on offenders. for example, a producer of the  best picture nominee the hurt locker was disqualified as a producer in the category when he contacted associates urging them to vote for his film and not another that was seen as the frontrunner .

the academy screening room or academy digital screening room is a secure streaming platform which allows voting members of the academy to view all eligible films  in one place. it was introduced in , for the  oscars, though dvd screeners and academy inperson screenings were still provided. for films to be included on the platform, the north american distributor must pay ,, including a watermarking fee, and a digital copy of the film to be prepared for streaming by the academy. the platform can be accessed via apple tv and roku players. the watermarking process involved several video security firms, creating a forensic watermark and restricting the ability to take screenshots or screen recordings.in , for the  oscars, the academy banned all physical screeners and inperson screenings, restricting official membership viewing to the academy screening room. films eligible in the documentary and international categories were made available in different sections of the platform. distributors can also pay an extra fee to add video featurettes to promote their films on the platform. the inperson screenings were said to be cancelled because of the covid pandemic. eligible films do not have to be added to the platform, but the academy advertises them to voting members when they are.

the major awards are presented at a live televised ceremony, commonly in late february or early march following the relevant calendar year, and six weeks after the announcement of the nominees. it is the culmination of the film awards season, which usually begins during november or december of the previous year. this is an elaborate extravaganza, with the invited guests walking up the red carpet in the creations of the most prominent fashion designers of the day. black tie dress is the most common outfit for men, although fashion may dictate not wearing a bowtie, and musical performers sometimes do not adhere to this .

the academy awards is the worlds longestrunning awards show televised live from the u.s. to all time zones in north america and worldwide, and gathers billions of viewers elsewhere throughout the world. the oscars were first televised in  by nbc, which continued to broadcast the event until , when abc took over, televising the festivities  through . nbc regained the rights for five years , then abc resumed broadcast duties in  and its current contract with the academy runs through . the academy has also produced condensed versions of the ceremony for broadcast in international markets  in more desirable local timeslots. the ceremony was broadcast live internationally for the first time via satellite since , but only two south american countries, chile and brazil, purchased the rights to air the broadcast. by that time, the television rights to the academy awards had been sold in  countries. a decade later, the rights were already being sold to  countries, and by , the tv rights to the awards were licensed in  countries.

the ceremonies were moved up from late march/early april to late february, since , to help disrupt and shorten the intense lobbying and ad campaigns associated with oscar season in the film industry. another reason was because of the growing tv ratings success coinciding with the ncaa basketball tournament, which would cut into the academy awards audience.  the earlier date is also to the advantage of abc, as it now usually occurs during the highly profitable and important february sweeps period. some years, the ceremony is moved into the first sunday of march to avoid a clash with the winter olympic games. another reason for the move to late february and early march is also to avoid the awards ceremony occurring so close to the religious holidays of passover and easter, which for decades had been a grievance from members and the general public. advertising is somewhat restricted, however, as traditionally no movie studios or competitors of official academy award sponsors may advertise during the telecast. the production of the academy awards telecast currently holds the distinction of winning the most emmys in history, with  wins and  nominations overall since that awards own launch in .after many years of being held on mondays at  pm eastern/ p.m pacific, since the  ceremonies, it was moved to sundays at  pm et/ pm pt. the reasons given for the move were that more viewers would tune in on sundays, that los angeles rushhour traffic jams could be avoided, and an earlier start time would allow viewers on the east coast to go to bed earlier. for many years the film industry opposed a sunday broadcast because it would cut into the weekend box office. in , the academy contemplated moving the ceremony even further back into january, citing tv viewers fatigue with the film industrys long awards season. however, such an accelerated schedule would dramatically decrease the voting period for its members, to the point where some voters would only have time to view the contending films streamed on their computers . furthermore, a january ceremony on sunday would clash with national football league playoff games. in , the academy announced that the ceremony would be moved from late february to mid february beginning with the nd academy awards in .originally scheduled for april , , the th academy awards ceremony was postponed for two days, because of the assassination of dr. martin luther king, jr. on march , , the rd academy awards was postponed for one day, after the shooting of president ronald reagan and others in washington, d.c.in , an in memoriam segment was introduced, honoring those who had made a significant contribution to cinema who had died in the preceding  months, a selection compiled by a small committee of academy members. this segment has drawn criticism over the years for the omission of some names. criticism was also levied for many years regarding another aspect, with the segment having a popularity contest feel as the audience varied their applause to those who had died by the subjects cultural impact; the applause has since been muted during the telecast, and the audience is discouraged from clapping during the segment and giving silent reflection instead. this segment was later followed by a commercial break.

in terms of broadcast length, the ceremony generally averages three and a half hours. the first oscars, in , lasted  minutes. at the other end of the spectrum, the  ceremony lasted four hours and twentythree minutes. in , the organizers of the academy awards announced winners acceptance speeches must not run past  seconds. this, according to organizer bill mechanic, was to ensure the elimination of what he termed the single most hated thing on the show  overly long and embarrassing displays of emotion. in , in a further effort to streamline speeches, winners dedications were displayed on an onscreen ticker. during the  ceremony, host jimmy kimmel acknowledged how long the ceremony had become, by announcing that he would give a brandnew jet ski to whoever gave the shortest speech of the night . the wall street journal analyzed the average minutes spent across the  telecasts as follows  on song performances;  on the hosts speeches;  on prerecorded clips; and  on the awards themselves, broken into  on the introduction and announcement,  on winners walking to the stage, and  on their acceptance speeches.although still dominant in ratings, the viewership of the academy awards has steadily dropped; the th academy awards were the lowestrated in the past eight years , while the show itself also faced mixed reception. following the show, variety reported that abc was, in negotiating an extension to its contract to broadcast the oscars, seeking to have more creative control over the broadcast itself. currently and nominally, ampas is responsible for most aspects of the telecast, including the choice of production staff and hosting, although abc is allowed to have some input on their decisions. in august , ampas extended its contract with abc through  the contract neither contains any notable changes nor gives abc any further creative control over the telecast.

historically, the telecasts viewership is higher when boxoffice hits are favored to win the best picture award. more than . million viewers tuned to the telecast for the th academy awards in , the year of titanic, which generated a box office haul during its initial  run of us. million in the us, a box office record that would remain unsurpassed for years. the th academy awards ceremony, in which the lord of the rings the return of the king  received  awards including best picture, drew . million viewers. the most watched ceremony based on nielsen ratings to date, however, was the nd academy awards  which drew a . household rating on april , . hoping to reinvigorate the preshow and ratings, the  oscars organizers hired members of the met gala creative teamby contrast, ceremonies honoring films that have not performed well at the box office tend to show weaker ratings, despite how much critical acclaim those films have received. the th academy awards which awarded lowbudget independent film crash  generated an audience of . million with a household rating of .. in , the th academy awards telecast was watched by . million viewers on average with an . household rating, the lowestrated and leastwatched ceremony at the time, in spite of celebrating  years of the academy awards. the best picture winner of that particular ceremony was another independent film .

whereas the nd academy awards drew an average of . million viewers, the rd academy awards drew an even lower viewership of . million, the lowest viewership recorded by nielsen since it started recording audience totals in . the th and th editions drew . and . million viewers, still below the audience of the nd edition.

the academy film archive holds copies of every academy awards ceremony since the  oscars and material on many prior ceremonies, along with ancillary material related to more recent shows. copies are held in a variety of film, video and digital formats.

in , the first academy awards were presented at a banquet dinner at the hollywood roosevelt hotel. from  to , the ceremony alternated between two venues the ambassador hotel on wilshire boulevard and the biltmore hotel in downtown los angeles.

graumans chinese theatre in hollywood then hosted the awards from  to , followed by the shrine auditorium in los angeles from  to . the st academy awards in  were held at the academy award theatre at what had been the academys headquarters on melrose avenue in hollywood.from  to , the awards were presented at hollywoods pantages theatre. with the advent of television, the awards from  to  took place simultaneously in hollywood and new york, first at the nbc international theatre  and then at the nbc century theatre, after which the ceremony took place solely in los angeles. the oscars moved to the santa monica civic auditorium in santa monica, california, in . by , the academy decided to move the ceremonies back to downtown los angeles, this time to the dorothy chandler pavilion at the los angeles county music center. in the late s and early s, the ceremony returned to the shrine auditorium.

in , hollywoods dolby theatre  became the presentations current venue.

in the first year of the awards, the best directing award was split into two categories . at times, the best original score award has also been split into separate categories . from the s through the s, the art direction , cinematography, and costume design awards were likewise split into two categories . prior to , the production design award was called art direction, while the makeup and hairstyling award was called makeup.

in august , the academy announced that several categories would not be televised live, but rather be recorded during commercial breaks and aired later in the ceremony.

following dissent from academy members, they announced that they would indeed air all  categories live. this followed several proposals  that the academy had announced but did not implement.

the board of governors meets each year and considers new award categories. to date, the following categories have been proposed

best casting rejected in 

best popular film proposed in  for presentation at the  ceremony; postponed until the  ceremony at the earliest 

best stunt coordination rejected every year from  to 

best title design rejected in 

the special academy awards are voted on by special committees, rather than by the academy membership as a whole. they are not always presented on an annual basis.

academy honorary award since 

academy scientific and technical award  since 

gordon e. sawyer award since 

jean hersholt humanitarian award since 

irving g. thalberg memorial award since 

academy special achievement award from  to , and again for 

academy juvenile award  to 

due to the positive exposure and prestige of the academy awards, many studios spend millions of dollars and hire publicists specifically to promote their films during what is typically called the oscar season. this has generated accusations of the academy awards being influenced more by marketing than by quality. william friedkin, an academy awardwinning film director and former producer of the ceremony, expressed this sentiment at a conference in new york in , describing it as the greatest promotion scheme that any industry ever devised for itself.tim dirks, editor of amcs filmsite.org, has written of the academy awards

unfortunately, the critical worth, artistic vision, cultural influence and innovative qualities of many films are not given the same voting weight. especially since the s, moneymaking formulamade blockbusters with glossy production values have often been crowdpleasing titans , but they havent necessarily been great films with depth or critical acclaim by any measure.a recent technique that has been claimed to be used during the oscar season is the whisper campaign. these campaigns are intended to spread negative perceptions of other movies nominated and are believed to be perpetrated by those that were involved in creating the movie. examples of whisper campaigns include the allegations against zero dark thirty suggesting that it justifies torture and the claim that lincoln distorts history.

typical criticism of the academy awards for best picture is that among the winners and nominees there is an overrepresentation of romantic historical epics, biographical dramas, romantic dramedies and family melodramas, most of which are released in the u.s. in the last three months of the calendar year. the oscars have been infamously known for selecting specific genres of movies to be awarded. the term oscar bait was coined to describe such movies. this has led, at times, to more specific criticisms that the academy is disconnected from the audience, e.g., by favoring oscar bait over audience favorites or favoring historical melodramas over critically acclaimed movies that depict current life issues.

the academy awards have long received criticism over its lack of diversity among the nominees. this criticism is based on the statistics from every academy awards since , which show that only . of academy award nominees have been nonwhite and since , . of nominees have been nonwhite, with the rate of winners being even more polarizing. due to a variety of reasons, including marketability and historical bans on interracial couples, a number of highprofile oscars have been given to yellowface portrayals, as well as performances of asian characters rewritten for white characters. it took until  for an asian woman to win an academy award for best actress, when michelle yeoh received the award for her performance in everything everywhere all at once. the th awards ceremony became the target of a boycott, popularized on social media with the hashtag oscarssowhite, based on activists perception that its allwhite acting nominee list reflected bias. in response, the academy initiated historic changes in membership by . some media critics claim the academys efforts to address its purported racial, gender and national biases are merely distractions. by contrast, the golden globe awards already have multiple winners of asian descent in leading actress categories. some question whether the academys definition of merit is just or empowering for nonamericans.

the academy doesnt have any rules for how to categorize whether a performance is leading or supporting, and it is up to the discretion of the studios whether a given performance is submitted for either best actor/actress or best supporting actor/actress. this has led situations where a film has two or more coleads, and one of these is submitted in a supporting category to avoid the two leads competing against each other, and to increase the films chances of winning. this practice has been derisively called category fraud. for example, rooney mara was nominated for best supporting actress for carol , despite her having a comparable amount of screentime to cate blanchett, who was nominated for best actress. another example is once upon a time in hollywood , where brad pitt was nominated for and won best supporting actor, even though he played an equally important role to best actor nominee leonardo dicaprio. in both these cases, critics argued that the weinstein company, the studio behind the former film, had placed someone who was actually a leading actor or actress into the supporting categories to avoid them competing against their colead.

acting prizes in certain years have been criticized for not recognizing superior performances so much as being awarded for personal popularity, to make up for a snub for a work that proved in time to be more popular or renowned than the one awarded, or presented as a career honor to recognize a distinguished nominees entire body of work.

following the st academy awards in february  in which the netflixbroadcast film roma had been nominated for ten awards including the best picture category, steven spielberg and other members of the academy discussed changing the requirements through the board of governors for films as to exclude those from netflix and other media streaming services. spielberg had been concerned that netflix as a movie production and distribution studio could spend much more than typical oscarwinning films and have much wider and earlier distribution than other best picturenominated films, while still being able to meet the minimal theatricalrun status to qualify for an oscar.the united states department of justice, having heard of this potential rule change, wrote a letter to the academy in march , cautioning them that placing additional restrictions on films that originate from streaming media services without proper justification could raise antitrust concerns against the academy. following its april  board meeting, the academy board of governors agreed to retain the current rules that allow for streaming media films to be eligible for oscars as long as they enjoy limited theatrical runs.

during the th academy awards on march , , chris rock joked about jada pinkett smiths shaved head with a g.i. jane reference. will smith walked onstage and slapped rock across the face, then returned to his seat and told rock, twice, to keep my wifes name out of your fucking mouth while later accepting the best actor award for king richard, smith apologized to the academy and the other nominees, but not to rock. rock decided not to press charges against smith.on april , , the academy made an announcement via a letter sent by president david rubin and ceo dawn hudson informing the public that will smith had received a tenyear ban from attending the oscars as a result of the incident.

some winners critical of the academy awards have boycotted the ceremonies and refused to accept their oscars. the first to do so was screenwriter dudley nichols . nichols boycotted the th academy awards ceremony because of conflicts between the academy and the writers guild. nichols eventually accepted the  award three years later, at the  ceremony. nichols was nominated for three further academy awards during his career.

george c. scott became the second person to refuse his award  at the rd academy awards ceremony. scott described it as a meat parade, saying, i dont want any part of it.the third person to refuse the award was marlon brando, who refused his award , citing the film industrys discrimination and mistreatment of native americans. at the th academy awards ceremony, brando asked actress and civil rights activist sacheen littlefeather to read a page speech in his place, detailing his criticisms, for which there was booing and cheering by the audience. littlefeather was much later discovered to have falsely misrepresented her ancestry as native american, that is, she was found to be a pretendian.

seven films have had nominations revoked before the official award ceremony

the circus   the film was voluntarily removed by the academy from competitive categories, to award charlie chaplin a special award.

hondo   removed from the best story ballot after letters from the producer and nominee questioned its inclusion in the category.

high society   withdrawn from screenwriting ballot after being mistaken for the  movie of the same title.

the godfather   initially nominated for eleven awards, its nomination for best original score was revoked after it was discovered that its main theme was very similar to music that the scores composer had written for an earlier film. none of its other nominations were revoked, and it received three oscars, including best picture.

a place in the world   removed from the best foreign language film ballot after it was discovered that the country which submitted the film exercised insufficient artistic control.

alone yet not alone   the films title song, alone yet not alone, was removed from the best original song ballot after bruce broughton was found to have improperly contacted other members of the academys musical branch; this was the first time that a film was removed from a ballot for ethical reasons.

 hours the secret soldiers of benghazi   sound mixer greg p. russells nomination was rescinded one day before the awards when it was discovered he had improperly contacted voters by telephone. in this case, the nominations for the other three nominated sound mixers, gary summers, jeffrey j. haboush and mac ruth, were allowed to stand.one film was disqualified after winning the award, and had the winner return the oscar

young americans   initially won the award for best documentary feature, but was later revoked after it was revealed that it had opened theatrically prior to the eligibility period.one film had its nomination revoked after the award ceremony when it had not won the oscar

tuba atlantic   its nomination for best live action short film was revoked when it was discovered that the film had aired on television in , before its theatrical release.

the following events are closely associated with the annual academy awards

bafta awards

csar awards

david di donatello awards

goya awards

nominees luncheon

governors awards

the th independent spirit awards , usually held in santa monica, california the saturday before the oscars, marked the first time it was moved to a friday and a change of venue to l.a. live

the annual night before, traditionally held at the beverly hills hotel, begun in  and generally known as the party of the season, benefits the motion picture  television fund, which operates a retirement home for sag actors in the san fernando valley

elton john aids foundation academy award party airs the awards live at the nearby pacific design center

the governors ball is the academys official afterparty, including dinner , and is adjacent to the awardspresentation venue

the vanity fair afterparty, historically at the former mortons restaurant, has been at the sunset tower since 

ariel award in mexico

it has become a tradition to give out gift bags to the presenters and performers at the oscars. in recent years, these gifts have also been extended to award nominees and winners. the value of each of these gift bags can reach into the tens of thousands of dollars. in , the value was reported to be as high as us,. the value has risen to the point where the u.s. internal revenue service issued a statement regarding the gifts and their taxable status.

oscar gift bags have included vacation packages to hawaii and mexico and japan, a private dinner party for the recipient and friends at a restaurant, videophones, a fournight stay at a hotel, watches, bracelets, spa treatments, bottles of vodka, maple salad dressing, weightloss gummie candy and up to , worth of cosmetic treatments and rejuvenation procedures such as lip fillers and chemical peels from new york city facial plastic surgeon konstantin vasyukevich. some of the gifts have even had a risque element to them; in , the adult products retailer adam  eve had a secret room gifting suite. celebrities visiting the gifting suite included judith hoag, carolyn hennesy, kate linder, chris mulkey, jim oheir and john salley.

from  onwards, results are livesd; all previous years are live viewing.

australia, officially the commonwealth of australia, is a sovereign country comprising the mainland of the australian continent, the island of tasmania, and numerous smaller islands. australia is the largest country by area in oceania and the worlds sixthlargest country. australia is the oldest, flattest, and driest inhabited continent, with the least fertile soils. it is a megadiverse country, and its size gives it a wide variety of landscapes and climates, with deserts in the centre, tropical rainforests in the northeast, tropical savannas in the north, and mountain ranges in the southeast. 

the ancestors of aboriginal australians began arriving from southeast asia , to , years ago, during the last ice age. arriving by sea, they settled the continent and had formed approximately  distinct language groups by the time of european settlement, maintaining some of the longest known continuing artistic and religious traditions in the world. australias written history commenced with the european maritime exploration of australia. the dutch navigator willem janszoon was the first known european to reach australia, in . in , the british explorer james cook mapped and claimed the east coast of australia for great britain, and the first fleet of british ships arrived at sydney in  to establish the penal colony of new south wales. the european population grew in subsequent decades, and by the end of the s gold rush, most of the continent had been explored by european settlers and an additional five selfgoverning british colonies established. democratic parliaments were gradually established through the th century, culminating with a vote for the federation of the six colonies and foundation of the commonwealth of australia on  january . this began a process of increasing autonomy from the united kingdom, highlighted by the statute of westminster adoption act , and culminating in the australia act .australia is a federal parliamentary constitutional monarchy, comprising six states and ten territories. australias population of nearly  million is highly urbanised and heavily concentrated on the eastern seaboard. canberra is the nations capital, while its most populous city and financial centre is sydney. the next four largest cities are melbourne, brisbane, perth, and adelaide. it is ethnically diverse and multicultural, the product of largescale immigration, with almost half of the population having at least one parent born overseas. australias abundant natural resources and welldeveloped international trade relations are crucial to the countrys economy, which generates its income from various sources including services, mining exports, banking, manufacturing, agriculture and international education. australia ranks highly for quality of life, health, education, economic freedom, civil liberties and political rights.australia has a highly developed market economy and one of the highest per capita incomes globally. australia is a regional power, and has the worlds thirteenthhighest military expenditure. it is a member of international groupings including the united nations; the g; the oecd; the world trade organization; asiapacific economic cooperation; the pacific islands forum; the pacific community; the commonwealth of nations; and the defence/security organisations anzus, aukus, and the five eyes. it is a major nonnato ally of the united states.

the name australia  is derived from the latin terra australis , a name used for a hypothetical continent in the southern hemisphere since ancient times. several sixteenth century cartographers used the word australia on maps, but not to identify modern australia. when europeans began visiting and mapping australia in the th century, the name terra australis was naturally applied to the new territories.until the early th century, australia was best known as new holland, a name first applied by the dutch explorer abel tasman in   and subsequently anglicised. terra australis still saw occasional usage, such as in scientific texts. the name australia was popularised by the explorer matthew flinders, who said it was more agreeable to the ear, and an assimilation to the names of the other great portions of the earth. the first time that australia appears to have been officially used was in april , when governor lachlan macquarie acknowledged the receipt of flinders charts of australia from lord bathurst. in december , macquarie recommended to the colonial office that it be formally adopted. in , the admiralty agreed that the continent should be known officially by that name. the first official published use of the new name came with the publication in  of the australia directory by the hydrographic office.colloquial names for australia include oz and the land down under . other epithets include the great southern land, the lucky country, the sunburnt country, and the wide brown land. the latter two both derive from dorothea mackellars  poem my country.

indigenous australians comprise two broad groups the aboriginal peoples of the australian mainland , and the torres strait islanders, who are a distinct melanesian people. human habitation of the australian continent is estimated to have begun , to , years ago, with the migration of people by land bridges and short sea crossings from what is now southeast asia. it is uncertain how many waves of immigration may have contributed to these ancestors of modern aboriginal australians. the madjedbebe rock shelter in arnhem land is recognised as the oldest site showing the presence of humans in australia. the oldest human remains found are the lake mungo remains, which have been dated to around , years ago.aboriginal australian culture is one of the oldest continuous cultures on earth. at the time of first european contact, aboriginal australians were complex huntergatherers with diverse economies and societies and about  different language groups. recent archaeological finds suggest that a population of , could have been sustained. aboriginal australians have an oral culture with spiritual values based on reverence for the land and a belief in the dreamtime.the torres strait islander people first settled their islands around  years ago. culturally and linguistically distinct from mainland aboriginal peoples, they were seafarers and obtained their livelihood from seasonal horticulture and the resources of their reefs and seas.

the northern coasts and waters of australia were visited sporadically for trade by makassan fishermen from what is now indonesia. the first recorded european sighting of the australian mainland, and the first recorded european landfall on the australian continent, are attributed to the dutch. the first ship and crew to chart the australian coast and meet with aboriginal people was the duyfken, captained by dutch navigator willem janszoon. he sighted the coast of cape york peninsula in early , and made landfall on  february  at the pennefather river near the modern town of weipa on cape york. later that year, spanish explorer lus vaz de torres sailed through and navigated the torres strait islands. the dutch charted the whole of the western and northern coastlines and named the island continent new holland during the th century, and although no attempt at settlement was made, a number of shipwrecks left men either stranded or, as in the case of the batavia in , marooned for mutiny and murder, thus becoming the first europeans to permanently inhabit the continent. in , captain james cook sailed along and mapped the east coast, which he named new south wales and claimed for great britain.following the loss of its american colonies in , the british government sent a fleet of ships, the first fleet, under the command of captain arthur phillip, to establish a new penal colony in new south wales. a camp was set up and the union flag raised at sydney cove, port jackson, on  january , a date which later became australias national day. most early convicts were transported for petty crimes and assigned as labourers or servants to free settlers . while the majority of convicts settled into colonial society once emancipated, convict rebellions and uprisings were also staged, but invariably suppressed under martial law. the  rum rebellion, the only successful armed takeover of government in australia, instigated a twoyear period of military rule. the following decade, social and economic reforms initiated by governor lachlan macquarie saw new south wales transition from a penal colony to a civil society.the indigenous population declined for  years following settlement, mainly due to infectious disease. thousands more died as a result of frontier conflict with settlers.

the british continued to push into other areas of the continent in the early th century, initially along the coast. in , a settlement was established in van diemens land , and in , gregory blaxland, william lawson and william wentworth crossed the blue mountains west of sydney, opening the interior to european settlement. the british claim extended to the whole australian continent in  when major edmund lockyer established a settlement on king george sound . the swan river colony  was established in , evolving into the largest australian colony by area, western australia. in accordance with population growth, separate colonies were carved from new south wales tasmania in , south australia in , new zealand in , victoria in , and queensland in . south australia was founded as a free provinceit was never a penal colony. western australia was also founded free but later accepted transported convicts, the last of which arrived in , decades after transportation had ceased to the other colonies.in , a legislative council nominated by the governor of new south wales was established, together with a new supreme court, thus limiting the powers of colonial governors. between  and , the six colonies individually gained responsible government, thus becoming elective democracies managing most of their own affairs while remaining part of the british empire. the colonial office in london retained control of some matters, notably foreign affairs and defence.in the midth century, explorers such as burke and wills went further inland to determine its agricultural potential and answer scientific questions. a series of gold rushes beginning in the early s led to an influx of new migrants from china, north america and continental europe, as well as outbreaks of bushranging and civil unrest; the latter peaked in  when ballarat miners launched the eureka rebellion against gold license fees.from , australian colonial governments began introducing policies resulting in the removal of many aboriginal children from their families and communities .

on  january , federation of the colonies was achieved after a decade of planning, constitutional conventions and referendums, resulting in the establishment of the commonwealth of australia as a nation and the entering into force of the australian constitution.after the  imperial conference, australia and several other selfgoverning british settler colonies were given the status of selfgoverning dominions within the british empire. australia was one of the founding members of the league of nations in , and subsequently of the united nations in . britains statute of westminster  formally ended most of the constitutional links between australia and the united kingdom. australia adopted it in , but it was backdated to  to confirm the validity of legislation passed by the australian parliament during world war ii.the federal capital territory  was formed in  as the location for the future federal capital of canberra. melbourne was the temporary seat of government from  to  while canberra was being constructed. the northern territory was transferred from the control of the south australian government to the federal parliament in . australia became the colonial ruler of the territory of papua  in  and of the territory of new guinea  in . the two were unified as the territory of papua and new guinea in  and gained independence from australia in .

in , australia joined the allies in fighting the first world war, and took part in many of the major battles fought on the western front. of about , who served, about , were killed and another , were wounded. many australians regard the defeat of the australian and new zealand army corps  at gallipoli in  as the nations baptism of fireits first major military action, with the anniversary of the landing at anzac cove commemorated each year on anzac day.from  to , australia joined the allies in fighting the second world war. australias armed forces fought in the pacific, european and mediterranean and middle east theatres. the shock of britains defeat in asia in , followed soon after by the bombing of darwin and other japanese attacks on australian soil, led to a widespread belief in australia that a japanese invasion was imminent, and a shift from the united kingdom to the united states as australias principal ally and security partner. since , australia has been a formal military ally of the united states, under the anzus treaty.

in the decades following world war ii, australia enjoyed significant increases in living standards, leisure time and suburban development. using the slogan populate or perish, the nation encouraged a large wave of immigration from across europe, with such immigrants referred to as new australians.a member of the western bloc during the cold war, australia participated in the korean war and the malayan emergency during the s and the vietnam war from  to . during this time, tensions over communist influence in society led to unsuccessful attempts by the menzies government to ban the communist party of australia, and a bitter splitting of the labor party in .as a result of a  referendum, the federal government received a mandate to implement policies to benefit aboriginal people, and all indigenous australians were included in the census. traditional ownership of land  was recognised in law for the first time when the high court of australia held in mabo v queensland  that the legal doctrine of terra nullius  did not apply to australia at the time of european settlement.following the final abolition of the white australia policy in , australias demography and culture transformed as a result of a large and ongoing wave of noneuropean immigration, mostly from asia. the late th century also saw an increasing focus on foreign policy ties with other pacific rim nations. while the australia act  severed the remaining vestigial constitutional ties between australia and the united kingdom, a  referendum resulted in  of voters rejecting a proposal to abolish the monarchy of australia and become a republic.following the september  attacks on the united states, australia joined the united states in fighting the afghanistan war from  to  and the iraq war from  to . the nations trade relations also became increasingly oriented towards east asia in the st century, with china becoming the nations largest trading partner by a large margin.during the covid pandemic which commenced in australia in , several of australias largest cities were locked down for extended periods of time, and free movement across state borders was restricted in an attempt to slow the spread of the sarscov virus.

surrounded by the indian and pacific oceans, australia is separated from asia by the arafura and timor seas, with the coral sea lying off the queensland coast, and the tasman sea lying between australia and new zealand. the worlds smallest continent and sixth largest country by total area, australiaowing to its size and isolationis often dubbed the island continent and is sometimes considered the worlds largest island. australia has , km  of coastline , and claims an extensive exclusive economic zone of ,, square kilometres . this exclusive economic zone does not include the australian antarctic territory.mainland australia lies between latitudes  and  south, and longitudes  and  east. australias size gives it a wide variety of landscapes, with tropical rainforests in the northeast, mountain ranges in the southeast, southwest and east, and desert in the centre. the desert or semiarid land commonly known as the outback makes up by far the largest portion of land. australia is the driest inhabited continent; its annual rainfall averaged over continental area is less than  mm. the population density is . inhabitants per square kilometre, although the large majority of the population lives along the temperate southeastern coastline. the population density exceeds , inhabitants per square kilometre in central melbourne.

the great barrier reef, the worlds largest coral reef, lies a short distance off the northeast coast and extends for over , km . mount augustus, claimed to be the worlds largest monolith, is located in western australia. at , m , mount kosciuszko is the highest mountain on the australian mainland. even taller are mawson peak , on the remote australian external territory of heard island, and, in the australian antarctic territory, mount mcclintock and mount menzies, at , m  and , m  respectively.eastern australia is marked by the great dividing range, which runs parallel to the coast of queensland, new south wales and much of victoria. the name is not strictly accurate, because parts of the range consist of low hills, and the highlands are typically no more than , m  in height. the coastal uplands and a belt of brigalow grasslands lie between the coast and the mountains, while inland of the dividing range are large areas of grassland and shrubland. these include the western plains of new south wales, and the mitchell grass downs and mulga lands of inland queensland. the northernmost point of the mainland is the tropical cape york peninsula.

the landscapes of the top end and the gulf countrywith their tropical climateinclude forest, woodland, wetland, grassland, rainforest and desert. at the northwest corner of the continent are the sandstone cliffs and gorges of the kimberley, and below that the pilbara. the victoria plains tropical savanna lies south of the kimberley and arnhem land savannas, forming a transition between the coastal savannas and the interior deserts. at the heart of the country are the uplands of central australia. prominent features of the centre and south include uluru , the famous sandstone monolith, and the inland simpson, tirari and sturt stony, gibson, great sandy, tanami, and great victoria deserts, with the famous nullarbor plain on the southern coast. the western australian mulga shrublands lie between the interior deserts and mediterraneanclimate southwest australia.

lying on the indoaustralian plate, the mainland of australia is the lowest and most primordial landmass on earth with a relatively stable geological history. the landmass includes virtually all known rock types and from all geological time periods spanning over . billion years of the earths history. the pilbara craton is one of only two pristine archaean .. ga  crusts identified on the earth.having been part of all major supercontinents, the australian continent began to form after the breakup of gondwana in the permian, with the separation of the continental landmass from the african continent and indian subcontinent. it separated from antarctica over a prolonged period beginning in the permian and continuing through to the cretaceous. when the last glacial period ended in about , bc, rising sea levels formed bass strait, separating tasmania from the mainland. then between about , and , bc, the lowlands in the north were flooded by the sea, separating new guinea, the aru islands, and the mainland of australia. the australian continent is moving toward eurasia at the rate of  to  centimetres a year.the australian mainlands continental crust, excluding the thinned margins, has an average thickness of  km, with a range in thickness from  km to  km. australias geology can be divided into several main sections, showcasing that the continent grew from west to east the archaean cratonic shields found mostly in the west, proterozoic fold belts in the centre and phanerozoic sedimentary basins, metamorphic and igneous rocks in the east.the australian mainland and tasmania are situated in the middle of the tectonic plate and have no active volcanoes, but due to passing over the east australia hotspot, recent volcanism has occurred during the holocene, in the newer volcanics province of western victoria and southeastern south australia. volcanism also occurs in the island of new guinea , and in the australian external territory of heard island and mcdonald islands. seismic activity in the australian mainland and tasmania is also low, with the greatest number of fatalities having occurred in the  newcastle earthquake.

the climate of australia is significantly influenced by ocean currents, including the indian ocean dipole and the el niosouthern oscillation, which is correlated with periodic drought, and the seasonal tropical lowpressure system that produces cyclones in northern australia. these factors cause rainfall to vary markedly from year to year. much of the northern part of the country has a tropical, predominantly summerrainfall . the southwest corner of the country has a mediterranean climate. the southeast ranges from oceanic  to humid subtropical , with the highlands featuring alpine and subpolar oceanic climates. the interior is arid to semiarid.driven by climate change, average temperatures have risen more than c since . associated changes in rainfall patterns and climate extremes exacerbate existing issues such as drought and bushfires.  was australias warmest recorded year, and the  bushfire season was the countrys worst on record. australias greenhouse gas emissions per capita are among the highest in the world.water restrictions are frequently in place in many regions and cities of australia in response to chronic shortages due to urban population increases and localised drought. throughout much of the continent, major flooding regularly follows extended periods of drought, flushing out inland river systems, overflowing dams and inundating large inland flood plains, as occurred throughout eastern australia in the early s after the s australian drought.

although most of australia is semiarid or desert, the continent includes a diverse range of habitats from alpine heaths to tropical rainforests. fungi typify that diversityan estimated , speciesof which only  have been describedoccur in australia. because of the continents great age, extremely variable weather patterns, and longterm geographic isolation, much of australias biota is unique. about  of flowering plants,  of mammals, more than  of birds, and  of inshore, temperatezone fish are endemic. australia has at least  species of reptile, more than any other country in the world. besides antarctica, australia is the only continent that developed without feline species. feral cats may have been introduced in the th century by dutch shipwrecks, and later in the th century by european settlers. they are now considered a major factor in the decline and extinction of many vulnerable and endangered native species. seafaring immigrants from asia are believed to have brought the dingo to australia sometime after the end of the last ice ageperhaps  years agoand aboriginal people helped disperse them across the continent as pets, contributing to the demise of thylacines on the mainland. australia is also one of  megadiverse countries.australian forests are mostly made up of evergreen species, particularly eucalyptus trees in the less arid regions; wattles replace them as the dominant species in drier regions and deserts. among wellknown australian animals are the monotremes ; a host of marsupials, including the kangaroo, koala, and wombat, and birds such as the emu and the kookaburra. australia is home to many dangerous animals including some of the most venomous snakes in the world. the dingo was introduced by austronesian people who traded with indigenous australians around  bce. many animal and plant species became extinct soon after first human settlement, including the australian megafauna; others have disappeared since european settlement, among them the thylacine.many of australias ecoregions, and the species within those regions, are threatened by human activities and introduced animal, chromistan, fungal and plant species. all these factors have led to australias having the highest mammal extinction rate of any country in the world. the federal environment protection and biodiversity conservation act  is the legal framework for the protection of threatened species. numerous protected areas have been created under the national strategy for the conservation of australias biological diversity to protect and preserve unique ecosystems;  wetlands are listed under the ramsar convention, and  natural world heritage sites have been established. australia was ranked st out of  countries in the world on the  environmental performance index. there are more than , animals and plants on australias threatened species list, including more than  animals.paleontologists discovered a fossil site of a prehistoric rainforest in mcgraths flat, in south australia, that presents evidence that this now arid desert and dry shrubland/grassland was once home to an abundance of life.

australia is a federal parliamentary constitutional monarchy. the country has maintained a stable liberal democratic political system under its constitution, which is one of the worlds oldest, since federation in . it is also one of the worlds oldest federations, in which power is divided between the federal and state and territorial governments. the australian system of government combines elements derived from the political systems of the united kingdom  and the united states , along with distinctive indigenous features.the federal government is separated into three branches

legislature the bicameral parliament, comprising the monarch , the senate, and the house of representatives;

executive the federal executive council, which in practice gives legal effect to the decisions of the cabinet, comprising the prime minister and other ministers of state appointed by the governorgeneral on the advice of parliament;

judiciary the high court of australia and other federal courts, whose judges are appointed by the governorgeneral on advice of parliamentcharles iii reigns as king of australia and is represented in australia by the governorgeneral at the federal level and by the governors at the state level, who by convention act on the advice of his ministers. thus, in practice the governorgeneral acts as a legal figurehead for the actions of the prime minister and the federal executive council. the governorgeneral, however, does have reserve powers which, in some situations, may be exercised outside the prime ministers request. these powers are held by convention and their scope is unclear. the most notable exercise of these powers was the dismissal of the whitlam government in the constitutional crisis of .

in the senate , there are  senators twelve each from the states and two each from the mainland territories . the house of representatives  has  members elected from singlemember electoral divisions, commonly known as electorates or seats, allocated to states on the basis of population, with each original state guaranteed a minimum of five seats. elections for both chambers are normally held every three years simultaneously; senators have overlapping sixyear terms except for those from the territories, whose terms are not fixed but are tied to the electoral cycle for the lower house; thus only  of the  places in the senate are put to each election unless the cycle is interrupted by a double dissolution.australias electoral system uses preferential voting for all lower house elections with the exception of tasmania and the act which, along with the senate and most state upper houses, combine it with proportional representation in a system known as the single transferable vote. voting is compulsory for all enrolled citizens  years and over in every jurisdiction, as is enrolment. the party with majority support in the house of representatives forms the government and its leader becomes prime minister. in cases where no party has majority support, the governorgeneral has the constitutional power to appoint the prime minister and, if necessary, dismiss one that has lost the confidence of parliament. due to the relatively unique position of australia operating as a westminster parliamentary democracy with an elected upper house, the system has sometimes been referred to as having a washminster mutation, or as a semiparliamentary system.there are two major political groups that usually form government, federally and in the states the australian labor party and the coalition, which is a formal grouping of the liberal party and its minor partner, the national party. the liberal national party and the country liberal party are merged state branches in queensland and the northern territory that function as separate parties at a federal level. within australian political culture, the coalition is considered centreright and the labor party is considered centreleft. independent members and several minor parties have achieved representation in australian parliaments, mostly in upper houses. the australian greens are often considered the third force in politics, being the third largest party by both vote and membership.the most recent federal election was held on  may  and resulted in the australian labor party, led by anthony albanese, being elected to government.

australia has six statesnew south wales , queensland , south australia , tasmania , victoria  and western australia and three mainland territoriesthe australian capital territory , the northern territory , and the jervis bay territory . the act and nt are mostly selfgoverning, except that the commonwealth parliament has the power to modify or repeal any legislation passed by the territory parliaments.under the constitution, the states essentially have plenary legislative power to legislate on any subject, whereas the commonwealth  parliament may legislate only within the subject areas enumerated under section . for example, state parliaments have the power to legislate with respect to education, criminal law and state police, health, transport, and local government, but the commonwealth parliament does not have any specific power to legislate in these areas. however, commonwealth laws prevail over state laws to the extent of the inconsistency.each state and major mainland territory has its own parliamentunicameral in the northern territory, the act and queensland, and bicameral in the other states. the states are sovereign entities, although subject to certain powers of the commonwealth as defined by the constitution. the lower houses are known as the legislative assembly ; the upper houses are known as the legislative council. the head of the government in each state is the premier and in each territory the chief minister. the king is represented in each state by a governor. in the commonwealth, the kings representative is the governorgeneral.the commonwealth parliament also directly administers the external territories of ashmore and cartier islands, christmas island, the cocos  islands, the coral sea islands, heard island and mcdonald islands, and the claimed region of australian antarctic territory, as well as the internal jervis bay territory, a naval base and sea port for the national capital in land that was formerly part of new south wales. the external territory of norfolk island previously exercised considerable autonomy under the norfolk island act  through its own legislative assembly and an administrator to represent the monarch. in , the commonwealth parliament abolished selfgovernment, integrating norfolk island into the australian tax and welfare systems and replacing its legislative assembly with a council. macquarie island is part of tasmania, and lord howe island of new south wales.

over recent decades, australias foreign relations have been driven by a focus on relationships within the asiapacific region and a continued close association with the united states through the anzus pact and its status as a major nonnato ally of that country. a regional power, australia is a member of regional and cultural groupings including the pacific islands forum, the pacific community and the commonwealth of nations, and is a participant in the asean mechanism and the east asia summit.

australia is a member of several defence, intelligence and security groupings including the five eyes intelligence alliance with the united states, united kingdom, canada and new zealand; the anzus alliance with the united states and new zealand; the aukus security treaty with the united states and united kingdom; the quadrilateral security dialogue with the united states, india and japan; the five power defence arrangements with new zealand, the united kingdom, malaysia and singapore; and the reciprocal access defence and security agreement with japan.

australia has pursued the cause of international trade liberalisation. it led the formation of the cairns group and asiapacific economic cooperation, and is a member of the organisation for economic cooperation and development  and the world trade organization . in recent decades, australia has entered into the comprehensive and progressive agreement for transpacific partnership and the regional comprehensive economic partnership multilateral free trade agreements as well as bilateral free trade agreements with the united states, china, japan, south korea, indonesia, the united kingdom and new zealand.australia maintains a deeply integrated relationship with neighbouring new zealand, with free mobility of citizens between the two countries under the transtasman travel arrangement and free trade under the closer economic relations agreement. the most favourably viewed countries by the australian people in  include new zealand, the united kingdom, japan, germany, taiwan, thailand, the united states and south korea. a founding member country of the united nations, australia is strongly committed to multilateralism, and maintains an international aid program under which some  countries receive assistance. australia ranked fourth in the center for global developments  commitment to development index.

australias armed forcesthe australian defence force comprise the royal australian navy , the australian army and the royal australian air force , in total numbering , personnel  as of november . the titular role of commanderinchief is vested in the governorgeneral, who appoints a chief of the defence force from one of the armed services on the advice of the government. in a diarchy, the chief of the defence force serves as cochairman of the defence committee, conjointly with the secretary of defence, in the command and control of the australian defence organisation.in the  budget, defence spending comprised  of gdp, representing the worlds th largest defence budget. australia has been involved in united nations and regional peacekeeping, disaster relief, as well as armed conflicts from the first world war onwards.

legal and social rights in australia are regarded as among the most developed in the world. attitudes towards lgbt people are generally positive within australia, and samesex marriage has been legal in the nation since . australia has had antidiscrimination laws regarding disability since .

australias highincome mixedmarket economy is rich in natural resources. it is the worlds fourteenthlargest by nominal terms, and the thlargest by ppp. as of , it has the secondhighest amount of wealth per adult, after luxembourg, and has the thirteenthhighest financial assets per capita. australia has a labour force of some . million, with an unemployment rate of . as of june . according to the australian council of social service, the poverty rate of australia exceeds . of the population, encompassing . million. it also estimated that there were ,  children under the age of  living in relative poverty. the australian dollar is the national currency, which is also shared with three island states in the pacific kiribati, nauru, and tuvalu.australian government debt, about  billion, exceeds . of the countrys total gdp, and is the worlds eighthhighest. australia had the secondhighest level of household debt in the world in , after switzerland. its house prices are among the highest in the world, especially in the large urban areas. the large service sector accounts for about . of total gdp, followed by the industrial sector , while the agriculture sector is by far the smallest, making up only . of total gdp. australia is the worlds stlargest exporter and thlargest importer. china is australias largest trading partner by a wide margin, accounting for roughly  of the countrys exports and . of its imports. other major export markets include japan, the united states, and south korea.australia has high levels of competitiveness and economic freedom, and was ranked fifth in the human development index in . as of , it is ranked twelfth in the index of economic freedom and nineteenth in the global competitiveness report. it attracted . million international tourists in , and was ranked thirteenth among the countries of asiapacific in  for inbound tourism. the  travel and tourism competitiveness report ranked australia seventhhighest in the world out of  countries. its international tourism receipts in  amounted to . billion.

in , australias energy sources were coal , hydropower , natural gas , liquid/gas fossil fuelswitching plants , oil , and other renewable resources like wind power, solar energy, and bioenergy . during the st century, australia has been trending to generate more energy using renewable resources and less energy using fossil fuels. in , australia used coal for  of all energy , wind power for . , natural gas for . , solar power for . , hydropower for . , bioenergy for . , and other sources like oil and waste coal mine gas for ..in august , australias government set a goal to achieve  of all energy in the country from renewable sources by . they achieved this goal, as renewable resources accounted for . of australias energy in .

in , australia spent a. billion on research and development, allocating about . of gdp. a recent study by accenture for the tech council shows that the australian tech sector combined contributes  billion a year to the economy and employs , people. the countrys most recognized and important sector of this type is mining, where australia continues to have the highest penetration of technologies, especially drones, autonomous and remotecontrolled vehicles and mine management software. in addition, recent startup ecosystems in sydney and melbourne are already valued at  billion combined. australia ranked th in the global innovation index .with only . of the worlds population, australia contributed . of the worlds published research in , making it one of the top  research contributors in the world. csiro, australias national science agency, contributes  of all research in the country, while the rest is carried out by universities. its most notable contributions include the invention of atomic absorption spectroscopy, the essential components of wifi technology, and the development of the first commercially successful polymer banknote.australia is a key player in supporting space exploration. facilities such as the square kilometre array and australia telescope compact array radio telescopes, telescopes such as the siding spring observatory, and ground stations such as the canberra deep space communication complex are of great assistance in deep space exploration missions, primarily by nasa.

australia has an average population density of . persons per square kilometre of total land area, which makes it one of the most sparsely populated countries in the world. the population is heavily concentrated on the east coast, and in particular in the southeastern region between south east queensland to the northeast and adelaide to the southwest.australia is highly urbanised, with  of the population living in the greater capital city statistical areas  in . metropolitan areas with more than one million inhabitants are sydney, melbourne, brisbane, perth and adelaide.in common with many other developed countries, australia is experiencing a demographic shift towards an older population, with more retirees and fewer people of working age. in  the average age of the australian population was . years. in , . of the australian population lived overseas, one of the lowest proportions worldwide.

between  and the second world war, the vast majority of settlers and immigrants came from the british isles , although there was significant immigration from china and germany during the th century. in the decades immediately following the second world war, australia received a large wave of immigration from across europe, with many more immigrants arriving from southern and eastern europe than in previous decades. since the end of the white australia policy in , australia has pursued an official policy of multiculturalism, and there has been a large and continuing wave of immigration from across the world, with asia being the largest source of immigrants in the st century.today, australia has the worlds eighthlargest immigrant population, with immigrants accounting for  of the population, the highest proportion among major western nations. , permanent immigrants were admitted to australia in  , whilst there was a net population gain of , people from all permanent and temporary immigration in that year. the majority of immigrants are skilled, but the immigration program includes categories for family members and refugees. in , the largest foreignborn populations were those born in england , india , mainland china , new zealand , the philippines  and vietnam .the australian bureau of statistics does not collect data on race, but asks each australian resident to nominate up to two ancestries each census. these ancestry responses are classified into broad standardised ancestry groups. at the  census, the number of ancestry responses within each standardised group as a proportion of the total population was as follows . european , . oceanian, . asian , . north african and middle eastern, . peoples of the americas, and . subsaharan african. at the  census, the most commonly nominated individual ancestries as a proportion of the total population were

at the  census, . of the australian population identified as being indigenousaboriginal australians and torres strait islanders.

although english is not the official language of australia in law, it is the de facto official and national language. australian english is a major variety of the language with a distinctive accent and lexicon, and differs slightly from other varieties of english in grammar and spelling. general australian serves as the standard dialect.at the  census, english was the only language spoken in the home for  of the population. the next most common languages spoken at home were mandarin , arabic , vietnamese , cantonese  and punjabi .over  australian aboriginal languages are thought to have existed at the time of first european contact. the national indigenous languages survey  for  found that more than  indigenous language varieties were in use or being revived, although  of those in use were endangered. the  census found that  indigenous languages were spoken at home by , indigenous australians. nils and the australian bureau of statistics use different classifications for indigenous australian languages.the australian sign language known as auslan was used at home by , people at the time of the  census.

australia has no state religion; section  of the australian constitution prohibits the federal government from making any law to establish any religion, impose any religious observance, or prohibit the free exercise of any religion. as of , a plurality of australians are irreligious.at the  census, . of the population identified as having no religion, up from . in . the largest religion is christianity . the largest christian denominations are the roman catholic church  and the anglican church of australia . multicultural immigration since the second world war has led to the growth of nonchristian religions, the largest of which are islam , hinduism , buddhism , sikhism , and judaism .in , just under , people declared an affiliation with traditional aboriginal religions. in australian aboriginal mythology and the animist framework developed in aboriginal australia, the dreaming is a sacred era in which ancestral totemic spirit beings formed the creation. the dreaming established the laws and structures of society and the ceremonies performed to ensure continuity of life and land.

australias life expectancy of  years , is the fifthhighest in the world. it has the highest rate of skin cancer in the world, while cigarette smoking is the largest preventable cause of death and disease, responsible for . of the total mortality and disease. ranked second in preventable causes is hypertension at ., with obesity third at .. australia ranked th in the world in  for its proportion of obese women and near the top of developed nations for its proportion of obese adults;  of its adult population is either overweight or obese.australia spent around . of its total gdp to health care in . it introduced universal health care in . known as medicare, it is now nominally funded by an income tax surcharge known as the medicare levy, currently at . the states manage hospitals and attached outpatient services, while the commonwealth funds the pharmaceutical benefits scheme  and general practice.during the covid pandemic australia had one of the most restrictive quarantine policies, resulting in one of the lowest death rates worldwide.

school attendance, or registration for home schooling, is compulsory throughout australia. education is the responsibility of the individual states and territories so the rules vary between states, but in general children are required to attend school from the age of about  until about . in some states , children aged  are required to either attend school or participate in vocational training, such as an apprenticeship.australia has an adult literacy rate that was estimated to be  in . however, a  report for the australian bureau of statistics reported that tasmania has a literacy and numeracy rate of only .australia has  governmentfunded universities and three private universities, as well as a number of other specialist institutions that provide approved courses at the higher education level. the oecd places australia among the most expensive nations to attend university. there is a statebased system of vocational training, known as tafe, and many trades conduct apprenticeships for training new tradespeople. about  of australians aged from  to  have vocational or tertiary qualifications and the tertiary graduation rate of  is the highest among oecd countries. . of australias population has attained a higher education qualification, which is among the highest percentages in the world.australia has the highest ratio of international students per head of population in the world by a large margin, with , international students enrolled in the nations universities and vocational institutions in . accordingly, in , international students represented on average . of the student bodies of australian universities. international education therefore represents one of the countrys largest exports and has a pronounced influence on the countrys demographics, with a significant proportion of international students remaining in australia after graduation on various skill and employment visas. education is australias thirdlargest export, after iron ore and coal, and contributed over  billion to the economy in .

the country is home to a diversity of cultures, a result of its history of immigration. prior to , australia was dominated by indigenous cultures. since then, australian culture has primarily been a western culture, strongly influenced by angloceltic settlers. other influences include australian aboriginal culture, the traditions brought to the country by waves of immigration from around the world, and the culture of the united states. the cultural divergence and evolution that has occurred over the centuries since european settlement has resulted in a distinctive australian culture.

australia has over , aboriginal rock art sites, and traditional designs, patterns and stories infuse contemporary indigenous australian art, the last great art movement of the th century according to critic robert hughes; its exponents include emily kame kngwarreye. early colonial artists showed a fascination with the unfamiliar land. the impressionistic works of arthur streeton, tom roberts and other members of the thcentury heidelberg schoolthe first distinctively australian movement in western artgave expression to nationalist sentiments in the leadup to federation. while the school remained influential into the s, modernists such as margaret preston, and, later, sidney nolan, explored new artistic trends. the landscape remained central to the work of aboriginal watercolourist albert namatjira, as well as fred williams, brett whiteley and other postwar artists whose works, eclectic in style yet uniquely australian, moved between the figurative and the abstract.australian literature grew slowly in the decades following european settlement though indigenous oral traditions, many of which have since been recorded in writing, are much older. in the thcentury, henry lawson and banjo paterson captured the experience of the bush using a distinctive australian vocabulary. their works are still popular; patersons bush poem waltzing matilda  is regarded as australias unofficial national anthem. miles franklin is the namesake of australias most prestigious literary prize, awarded annually to the best novel about australian life. its first recipient, patrick white, went on to win the nobel prize in literature in . australian booker prize winners include peter carey, thomas keneally and richard flanagan. australian public intellectuals have also written seminal works in their respective fields, including feminist germaine greer and philosopher peter singer.many of australias performing arts companies receive funding through the federal governments australia council. there is a symphony orchestra in each state, and a national opera company, opera australia, well known for its famous soprano joan sutherland. at the beginning of the th century, nellie melba was one of the worlds leading opera singers. ballet and dance are represented by the australian ballet and various state companies. each state has a publicly funded theatre company.

the story of the kelly gang , the worlds first featurelength narrative film, spurred a boom in australian cinema during the silent film era. after world war i, hollywood monopolised the industry, and by the s australian film production had effectively ceased. with the benefit of government support, the australian new wave of the s brought provocative and successful films, many exploring themes of national identity, such as wake in fright and gallipoli, while crocodile dundee and the ozploitation movements mad max series became international blockbusters. in a film market flooded with foreign content, australian films delivered a . share of the local box office in . the aactas are australias premier film and television awards, and notable academy award winners from australia include geoffrey rush, nicole kidman, cate blanchett and heath ledger.australia has two public broadcasters , three commercial television networks, several paytv services, and numerous public, nonprofit television and radio stations. each major city has at least one daily newspaper, and there are two national daily newspapers, the australian and the australian financial review. in , reporters without borders placed australia th on a list of  countries ranked by press freedom, behind new zealand  but ahead of the united kingdom  and united states . this relatively low ranking is primarily because of the limited diversity of commercial media ownership in australia; most print media are under the control of news corporation and nine entertainment co.

most indigenous australian groups subsisted on a simple huntergatherer diet of native fauna and flora, otherwise called bush tucker. the first settlers introduced british and irish cuisine to the continent. this influence is seen in the enduring popularity of several british dishes such as fish and chips, and in quintessential australian dishes such as the australian meat pie, which is related to the british steak pie. postwar immigration transformed australian cuisine. for instance, southern european migrants helped to build a thriving australian coffee culture which gave rise to australian coffee drinks such as the flat white, while east asian migration led to dishes such as the cantoneseinfluenced dim sim and chiko roll, as well as a distinct australian chinese cuisine. sausage sizzles, pavlovas, lamingtons, meat pies, vegemite and anzac biscuits are regarded as iconic australian foods.australia is a leading exporter and consumer of wine. australian wine is produced mainly in the southern, cooler parts of the country. the nation also ranks highly in beer consumption, with each state and territory hosting numerous breweries. australia is also known for its cafe and coffee culture in urban centres.

cricket and football are the predominant sports in australia during the summer and winter months, respectively. australia is unique in that it has professional leagues for four football codes. originating in melbourne in the s, australian rules football is the most popular code in all states except new south wales and queensland, where rugby league holds sway, followed by rugby union. soccer, while ranked fourth in popularity and resources, has the highest overall participation rates. cricket is popular across all borders and has been regarded by many australians as the national sport. the australian national cricket team competed against england in the first test match  and the first one day international , and against new zealand in the first twenty international , winning all three games. it has also participated in every edition of the cricket world cup, winning the tournament a record five times.australia is one of five nations to have participated in every summer olympics of the modern era, and has hosted the games twice  in melbourne and  in sydney. it is also set to host the  games in brisbane. australia has also participated in every commonwealth games, hosting the event in , , ,  and . as well as being a regular fifa world cup participant, australia has won the ofc nations cup four times and the afc asian cup oncethe only country to have won championships in two different fifa confederations.other major international events held in australia include the australian open tennis grand slam tournament and the australian formula one grand prix. the annual melbourne cup horse race and the sydney to hobart yacht race also attract intense interest. australia is also notable for waterbased sports, such as swimming and surfing. the surf lifesaving movement originated in australia, and the volunteer lifesaver is one of the countrys icons. snow sports take place primarily in the australian alps and tasmania.

donald john trump  is an american politician, media personality, and businessman who served as the th president of the united states from  to .

trump received a bs in economics from the university of pennsylvania in , and his father named him president of his real estate business in . trump renamed it the trump organization and expanded its operations to building and renovating skyscrapers, hotels, casinos, and golf courses. after a series of business reversals in the late twentieth century, he successfully launched various side ventures that required little capital, mostly by licensing the trump name. from  to , he coproduced and hosted the reality television series the apprentice. he and his businesses have been plaintiff or defendant in more than , state and federal legal actions, including six business bankruptcies.

trump won the  presidential election as the republican nominee against democratic nominee hillary clinton while losing the popular vote. during the campaign, his political positions were described as populist, protectionist, isolationist, and nationalist. his election and policies sparked numerous protests. he was the first u.s. president with no prior military or government experience. the  special counsel investigation established that russia had interfered in the  election to favor trumps campaign. trump promoted conspiracy theories and made many false and misleading statements during his campaigns and presidency, to a degree unprecedented in american politics. many of his comments and actions have been characterized as racially charged or racist and many as misogynistic.

as president, trump ordered a travel ban on citizens from several muslimmajority countries, diverted military funding toward building a wall on the u.s.mexico border, and implemented a policy of family separations for migrants detained at the u.s. border. he weakened environmental protections, rolling back more than  environmental policies and regulations. he signed the tax cuts and jobs act of , which cut taxes for individuals and businesses and rescinded the individual health insurance mandate penalty of the affordable care act. he appointed neil gorsuch, brett kavanaugh, and amy coney barrett to the u.s. supreme court. trump initiated a trade war with china and withdrew the u.s. from the proposed transpacific partnership trade agreement, the paris agreement on climate change, and the iran nuclear deal. he met with north korean leader kim jong un three times but made no progress on denuclearization. he reacted slowly to the covid pandemic, ignored or contradicted many recommendations from health officials, used political pressure to interfere with testing efforts, and spread misinformation about unproven treatments.

trump lost the  presidential election to joe biden. he refused to concede defeat, falsely claiming widespread electoral fraud, and attempted to overturn the results by pressuring government officials, mounting scores of unsuccessful legal challenges, and obstructing the presidential transition. on january , , he urged his supporters to march to the u.s. capitol, which many of them then attacked, resulting in multiple deaths and interrupting the electoral vote count.

trump is the only american president to have been impeached twice. after he tried to pressure ukraine in  to investigate biden, he was impeached in december by the house of representatives for abuse of power and obstruction of congress; he was acquitted by the senate in february . the house impeached him a second time in january , for incitement of insurrection, and the senate acquitted him the next month. scholars and historians rank trump as one of the worst presidents in american history.since leaving office, trump has remained heavily involved in the republican party. in november , he announced his candidacy for the republican nomination in the  presidential election. in march , a manhattan grand jury indicted him on  felony counts of falsifying business records. in june, a miami federal grand jury indicted him on  felonies related to his handling of classified documents. in august, a washington, d.c., federal grand jury indicted him on four felony counts of conspiracy and obstruction related to efforts to overturn the  election. later in august, a fulton county, georgia, grand jury indicted him on  charges for racketeering and other felonies committed in an effort to overturn the states  election results. trump pleaded not guilty to all charges.

donald john trump was born on june , , at jamaica hospital in queens, new york city, the fourth child of fred trump, a bronxborn real estate developer whose parents were german immigrants, and mary anne macleod trump, an immigrant from scotland. trump grew up with older siblings maryanne, fred jr., and elizabeth and younger brother robert in the jamaica estates neighborhood of queens, and attended the private kewforest school from kindergarten through seventh grade. at age , he was enrolled at the new york military academy, a private boarding school, and, in , he enrolled at fordham university. two years later, he transferred to the wharton school of the university of pennsylvania, graduating in may  with a bachelor of science in economics. in , trumps lawyer michael cohen threatened trumps colleges, high school, and the college board with legal action if they released trumps academic records.while in college, trump obtained four student draft deferments during the vietnam war era. in , he was deemed fit for military service based upon a medical examination, and in july , a local draft board classified him as eligible to serve. in october , he was classified y, a conditional medical deferment, and in , he was reclassified f due to bone spurs, permanently disqualifying him from service.

in , trump married czech model ivana zelnkov. they had three children donald jr. , ivanka , and eric . ivana became a naturalized united states citizen in . the couple divorced in , following trumps affair with actress marla maples. trump and maples married in  and divorced in . they have one daughter, tiffany , who was raised by marla in california. in , trump married slovenian model melania knauss. they have one son, barron . melania gained u.s. citizenship in .

trump went to sunday school and was confirmed in  at the first presbyterian church in jamaica, queens. in the s, his parents joined the marble collegiate church in manhattan, which belongs to the reformed church in america. the pastor at marble, norman vincent peale, ministered to the family until his death in . trump has described him as a mentor. in , the church stated that trump was not an active member. in , he appointed his personal pastor, televangelist paula white, to the white house office of public liaison. in , he said he identified as a nondenominational christian.

trump has called golfing his primary form of exercise but usually does not walk the course. he considers exercise a waste of energy because he believes exercise depletes the bodys energy like a battery, with a finite amount of energy. in , trumps campaign released a letter from his longtime personal physician, harold bornstein, stating that trump would be the healthiest individual ever elected to the presidency. in , bornstein said trump had dictated the contents of the letter and that three trump agents had seized his medical records in a february  raid on the doctors office.

in , trump made the initial forbes list of wealthy people for holding a share of his familys estimated  million net worth . his losses in the s dropped him from the list between  and . after filing the mandatory financial disclosure report with the fec in july , he announced a net worth of about  billion. records released by the fec showed at least . billion in assets and  million in liabilities. forbes estimated his net worth dropped by . billion between  and . in their  billionaires ranking, trumps net worth was estimated to be . billion .journalist jonathan greenberg reported that trump called him in , pretending to be a fictional trump organization official named john barron. greenberg said that trump, speaking as barron, falsely asserted that he owned more than  percent of his fathers business to get a higher ranking for himself on the forbes  list of wealthy americans. greenberg also wrote that forbes had vastly overestimated trumps wealth and wrongly included him on the forbes  rankings of , , and .trump has often said he began his career with a small loan of one million dollars from his father and that he had to pay it back with interest. he was a millionaire by age eight, borrowed at least  million from his father, largely failed to repay those loans, and received another  million  from his fathers company. in , he and his family were reported to have committed tax fraud, and the new york state department of taxation and finance started an investigation. his investments underperformed the stock and new york property markets. forbes estimated in october  that his net worth declined from . billion in  to . billion in  and his productlicensing income from  million to  million.contrary to his claims of financial health and business acumen, trumps tax returns from  to  show net losses totaling . billion. the losses were higher than those of almost every other american taxpayer. the losses in  and , more than  million each year, were more than double those of the nearest taxpayers. in , his reported losses were . million .in , the new york times obtained trumps tax information extending over two decades. its reporters found that trump reported losses of hundreds of millions of dollars and had, since , deferred declaring  million in forgiven debt as taxable income. his income mainly came from his share in the apprentice and businesses in which he was a minority partner, and his losses mainly from majorityowned businesses. much income was in tax credits for his losses, which let him avoid annual income tax payments or lower them to . during the s, trump balanced his businesses losses by selling and borrowing against assets, including a  million mortgage on trump tower  and the liquidation of over  million in stocks and bonds. he personally guaranteed  million in debt, most of which is due by .as of october , trump had over . billion in total debts, much of which is secured by his assets. in , he owed  million to banks and trust organizations, including bank of china, deutsche bank, and ubs, and approximately  million to unknown creditors. the value of his assets exceeds his debt.

starting in , trump was employed at his fathers real estate company, trump management, which owned racially segregated middleclass rental housing in new york citys outer boroughs. in , he became president of the company and began using the trump organization as an umbrella brand. between  and , he filed for chapter  bankruptcy protection for six of his businesses, the plaza hotel in manhattan, the casinos in atlantic city, new jersey, and the trump hotels  casino resorts company.

trump attracted public attention in  with the launch of his familys first manhattan venture, the renovation of the derelict commodore hotel, adjacent to grand central terminal. the financing was facilitated by a  million city property tax abatement arranged for trump by his father who also, jointly with hyatt, guaranteed a  million bank construction loan. the hotel reopened in  as the grand hyatt hotel, and that same year, trump obtained rights to develop trump tower, a mixeduse skyscraper in midtown manhattan. the building houses the headquarters of the trump corporation and trumps pac and was trumps primary residence until .in , trump acquired the plaza hotel with a loan from a consortium of sixteen banks. the hotel filed for bankruptcy protection in , and a reorganization plan was approved a month later, with the banks taking control of the property. in , trump defaulted on over  billion of bank loans, and the lenders seized the plaza hotel along with most of his other properties in a humiliating restructuring that allowed trump to avoid personal bankruptcy. the lead banks attorney said of the banks decision that they all agreed that hed be better alive than dead.in , trump acquired the mostly vacant story skyscraper at  wall street, later rebranded as the trump building, and renovated it. in the early s, trump won the right to develop a acre  tract in the lincoln square neighborhood near the hudson river. struggling with debt from other ventures in , trump sold most of his interest in the project to asian investors, who were able to finance the projects completion, riverside south.

in , trump opened harrahs at trump plaza, a hotel and casino, with financing and management help from the holiday corporation. it was unprofitable, and trump paid holiday  million in may  to take sole control. in , trump bought the unopened atlantic city hilton hotel and renamed it trump castle. his wife ivana managed it until . both casinos filed for chapter  bankruptcy protection in .trump bought a third atlantic city venue in , the trump taj mahal. it was financed with  million in junk bonds and completed for . billion, opening in april . trump filed for chapter  bankruptcy protection in . under the provisions of the restructuring agreement, trump gave up half his initial stake and personally guaranteed future performance. to reduce his  million of personal debt, he sold the trump shuttle airline; his megayacht, the trump princess, which had been leased to his casinos and kept docked; and other businesses.in , trump founded trump hotels  casino resorts , which assumed ownership of the trump plaza. thcr purchased the taj mahal and the trump castle in  and went bankrupt in  and , leaving trump with  percent ownership. he remained chairman until .

in , trump acquired the maralago estate in palm beach, florida. in , he converted the estate into a private club with an initiation fee and annual dues. he continued to use a wing of the house as a private residence. in , trump declared maralago his primary residence.

the trump organization began building and buying golf courses in . it owns fourteen and manages another three trumpbranded courses worldwide.trump visited a trump organization property on   of the , days of his presidency and is estimated to have played  rounds of golf, one every . days.

the trump name has been licensed for various consumer products and services, including foodstuffs, apparel, adult learning courses, and home furnishings. according to an analysis by the washington post, there are more than  licensing or management deals involving trumps name, and they have generated at least  million in revenue for his companies. by , only two consumer goods companies continued to license his name.

in september , trump purchased the new jersey generals, a team in the united states football league. after the  season, the league folded, largely due to trumps strategy of moving games to a fall schedule  and trying to force a merger with the nfl by bringing an antitrust suit against the organization.trumps businesses have hosted several boxing matches at the atlantic city convention hall, adjacent to and promoted as taking place at the trump plaza in atlantic city. in  and , trump lent his name to the tour de trump cycling stage race, which was an attempt to create an american equivalent of european races such as the tour de france or the giro ditalia.from  to , trump purchased significant blocks of shares in various public companies while suggesting that he intended to take over the company and then sold his shares for a profit, leading some observers to think he was engaged in greenmail. the new york times found that trump initially made millions of dollars in such stock transactions, but later lost most, if not all, of those gains after investors stopped taking his takeover talk seriously.in , trump purchased the eastern air lines shuttle, financing the purchase with  million  in loans from a syndicate of  banks. he renamed the airline trump shuttle and operated it until . trump defaulted on his loans in , and ownership passed to the banks. the airline was eventually sold to us airways.in , trump, his siblings maryanne, elizabeth, and robert, and his cousin john w. walter, each with a  percent share, formed all county building supply  maintenance corp. the company had no offices and is alleged to have been a shell company for paying the vendors providing services and supplies for trumps rental units, then billing those services and supplies to trump management with markups of  percent and more. the owners shared the proceeds generated by the markups. the increased costs were used as justification to get state approval for increasing the rents of trumps rentstabilized units.

from  to , trump owned all or part of the miss universe pageants, including miss usa and miss teen usa. due to disagreements with cbs about scheduling, he took both pageants to nbc in . in , trump received a star on the hollywood walk of fame for his work as producer of miss universe. nbc and univision dropped the pageants from their broadcasting lineups in june .

in , trump cofounded trump university, a company that sold real estate training courses priced from , to ,. after new york state authorities notified the company that its use of the word university violated state law , its name was changed to the trump entrepreneur initiative in .in , the state of new york filed a  million civil suit against trump university, alleging that the company made false statements and defrauded consumers. in addition, two class actions were filed in federal court against trump and his companies. internal documents revealed that employees were instructed to use a hardsell approach, and former employees testified that trump university had defrauded or lied to its students. shortly after he won the  presidential election, trump agreed to pay a total of  million to settle the three cases.

the donald j. trump foundation was a private foundation established in . in the foundations final years, its funds mostly came from donors other than trump, who did not donate any personal funds to the charity from  until . the foundation gave to healthcare and sportsrelated charities, as well as conservative groups.in , the washington post reported that the charity committed several potential legal and ethical violations, including alleged selfdealing and possible tax evasion. also in , the new york attorney general determined the foundation to be in violation of state law for soliciting donations and ordered it to immediately cease its fundraising activities in new york. trumps team announced in december  that the foundation would be dissolved.in june , the new york attorney generals office filed a civil suit against the foundation, trump, and his adult children, seeking . million in restitution and additional penalties. in december , the foundation ceased operation and disbursed its assets to other charities. in november , a new york state judge ordered trump to pay  million to a group of charities for misusing the foundations funds, in part to finance his presidential campaign.

roy cohn was trumps fixer, lawyer, and mentor for  years in the s and s. according to trump, cohn sometimes waived fees due to their friendship. in , cohn helped trump countersue the united states government for  million  over its charges that trumps properties had racial discriminatory practices. trumps counterclaims were dismissed, and the governments case went forward, ultimately resulting in a settlement. in , an agreement was struck requiring trumps properties to furnish the new york urban league with a list of all apartment vacancies, every week for two years, among other things. cohn introduced political consultant roger stone to trump, who enlisted stones services to deal with the federal government.according to a review of state and federal court files conducted by usa today in , trump and his businesses had been involved in more than , state and federal legal actions. while trump has not filed for personal bankruptcy, his overleveraged hotel and casino businesses in atlantic city and new york filed for chapter  bankruptcy protection six times between  and . they continued to operate while the banks restructured debt and reduced trumps shares in the properties.during the s, more than  banks had lent trump  billion. after his corporate bankruptcies of the early s most major banks, with the exception of deutsche bank, declined to lend to him. after the january  united states capitol attack, the bank decided not to do business with trump or his company in the future.

using ghostwriters, trump has produced up to  books on business, financial, or political topics under his name. his first book, the art of the deal , was a new york times best seller. while trump was credited as coauthor, the entire book was written by tony schwartz. according to the new yorker, the book expanded trumps renown far beyond new york city, making him an emblem of the successful tycoon. trump has called the volume his second favorite book, after the bible.

trump made cameo appearances in many films and television shows from  to .trump had a sporadic relationship with the professional wrestling promotion wwe since the late s. he appeared at wrestlemania  in  and was inducted into the celebrity wing of the wwe hall of fame in .

starting in the s, trump was a guest about  times on the nationally syndicated howard stern show. he also had his own shortform talk radio program called trumped  from  to . from  until , he was a weekly unpaid guest commentator on fox  friends.from  to , trump was coproducer and host of reality shows the apprentice and the celebrity apprentice. trump played a flattering, highly fictionalized version of himself as a superrich and successful chief executive who eliminated contestants with the catchphrase youre fired. the shows remade his image for millions of viewers nationwide. with the related licensing agreements, they earned him more than  million which he invested in largely unprofitable businesses.in february , trump resigned from the screen actors guild he had been a member of since  rather than face a disciplinary committee hearing for inciting the january , , mob attack on the u.s. capitol and for his reckless campaign of misinformation aimed at discrediting and ultimately threatening the safety of journalists. two days later, the union permanently barred him from readmission.

trumps political party affiliation has changed numerous times. he registered as a republican in ; a member of the independence party, the new york state affiliate of the reform party, in ; a democrat in ; a republican in ; unaffiliated in ; and a republican in .in , trump placed fullpage advertisements in three major newspapers, expressing his views on foreign policy and on how to eliminate the federal budget deficit. he ruled out running for local office but not for the presidency. in , he approached lee atwater, asking to be put into consideration to be republican nominee george h. w. bushs running mate. bush found the request strange and unbelievable.

in , trump ran in the california and michigan primaries for nomination as the reform party candidate for the  united states presidential election but withdrew from the race in february . a july  poll matching him against likely republican nominee george w. bush and likely democratic nominee al gore showed trump with seven percent support.

in , trump speculated about running against president barack obama in the  election, making his first speaking appearance at the conservative political action conference  in february  and giving speeches in early primary states. in may , he announced he would not run, and he endorsed mitt romney in february . trumps presidential ambitions were generally not taken seriously at the time.

trumps fame and provocative statements earned him an unprecedented amount of free media coverage, elevating his standing in the republican primaries. he adopted the phrase truthful hyperbole, coined by his ghostwriter tony schwartz, to describe his public speaking style. his campaign statements were often opaque and suggestive, and a record number of them were false. the los angeles times wrote, never in modern presidential politics has a major candidate made false statements as routinely as trump has. trump said he disdained political correctness and frequently made claims of media bias.

trump announced his candidacy in june . his campaign was initially not taken seriously by political analysts, but he quickly rose to the top of opinion polls. he became the frontrunner in march  and was declared the presumptive republican nominee in may.hillary clinton led trump in national polling averages throughout the campaign, but, in early july, her lead narrowed. in midjuly trump selected indiana governor mike pence as his vice presidential running mate, and the two were officially nominated at the  republican national convention.

trump and clinton faced off in three presidential debates in september and october . trump twice refused to say whether he would accept the result of the election.

trumps political positions and rhetoric were rightwing populist. politico described them as eclectic, improvisational and often contradictory, quoting a healthcare policy expert at the american enterprise institute as saying that his political positions were a total random assortment of whatever plays publicly. nbc news counted  distinct shifts on  major issues during his campaign.trump questioned the need for nato and espoused views that were described as isolationist, noninterventionist, and protectionist. his campaign platform emphasized renegotiating u.s.china relations and free trade agreements such as nafta and the transpacific partnership, strongly enforcing immigration laws, and building a new wall along the u.s.mexico border. other campaign positions included pursuing energy independence while opposing climate change regulations such as the clean power plan and the paris agreement, modernizing and expediting services for veterans, repealing and replacing the affordable care act, abolishing common core education standards, investing in infrastructure, simplifying the tax code while reducing taxes for all economic classes, and imposing tariffs on imports by companies that offshore jobs. he advocated a largely noninterventionist approach to foreign policy while increasing military spending, extreme vetting or banning immigrants from muslimmajority countries to preempt domestic islamic terrorism, and aggressive military action against the islamic state of iraq and the levant. he described nato as obsolete.trump helped bring farright fringe ideas, beliefs, and organizations into the mainstream. trump was slow to disavow an endorsement from david duke after he was questioned about it during a cnn interview on february , . duke enthusiastically supported trump and said he and likeminded people voted for trump because of his promises to take our country back. in august , trump hired steve bannon, the executive chairman of breitbart newsdescribed by bannon as the platform for the altrightas his campaign ceo. the altright movement coalesced around and supported trumps candidacy, due in part to its opposition to multiculturalism and immigration.

trumps fecrequired reports listed assets above . billion and outstanding debts of at least  million.

trump did not release his tax returns, contrary to the practice of every major candidate since  and his promises in  and  to do so if he ran for office. he said his tax returns were being audited, and that his lawyers had advised him against releasing them. after a lengthy court battle to block release of his tax returns and other records to the manhattan district attorney for a criminal investigation, including two appeals by trump to the united states supreme court, in february  the high court allowed the records to be released to the prosecutor for review by a grand jury.in october , portions of trumps state filings for  were leaked to a reporter from the new york times. they show that trump had declared a loss of  million that year, which could have let him avoid taxes for up to  years.

on november , , trump received  pledged electoral votes versus  for clinton, though, after elector defections on both sides, the official count was ultimately  to . trump received nearly . million fewer popular votes than clinton, which made him the fifth person to be elected president while losing the popular vote. trump also became the only president who neither served in the military nor held any government office prior to becoming president.

trumps victory was a political upset. polls had consistently shown clinton with a nationwidethough diminishinglead, as well as an advantage in most of the competitive states. trumps support had been modestly underestimated, while clintons had been overestimated.trump won  states, including michigan, pennsylvania, and wisconsin, states which had been considered a blue wall of democratic strongholds since the s. clinton won  states and the district of columbia. trumps victory marked the return of an undivided republican governmenta republican white house combined with republican control of both chambers of congress.

trumps election victory sparked protests in major u.s. cities in the days following the election. on the day after trumps inauguration, an estimated . million people worldwide, including an estimated half million in washington, d.c., protested against trump in the womens marches.

trump was inaugurated on january , . during his first week in office, he signed six executive orders, which authorized interim procedures in anticipation of repealing the affordable care act , withdrawal from the transpacific partnership negotiations, reinstatement of the mexico city policy, advancement of the keystone xl and dakota access pipeline construction projects, reinforcement of border security, and a planning and design process to construct a wall along the u.s. border with mexico.trumps daughter ivanka and soninlaw jared kushner became his assistant and senior advisor, respectively.

before being inaugurated, trump moved his businesses into a revocable trust run by his sons, eric and donald jr., and a business associate. though he said he would eschew new foreign deals, the trump organization pursued expansions of its operations in dubai, scotland, and the dominican republic. trump continued to profit from his businesses and to know how his administrations policies affected his businesses.he was sued for violating the domestic and foreign emoluments clauses of the u.s. constitution, marking the first time that the clauses had been substantively litigated. one case was dismissed in lower court. two were dismissed by the u.s. supreme court as moot after the end of trumps term.

trump took office at the height of the longest economic expansion in american history, which began in june  and continued until february , when the covid recession began.in december , trump signed the tax cuts and jobs act of . the bill had been passed by both republicancontrolled chambers of congress without any democratic votes. it reduced tax rates for businesses and individuals, with business tax cuts to be permanent and individual tax cuts set to expire after , and eliminated the penalty associated with affordable care acts individual mandate. the trump administration claimed that the act would either increase tax revenues or pay for itself by prompting economic growth. instead, revenues in  were . percent lower than projected.despite a campaign promise to eliminate the national debt in eight years, trump approved large increases in government spending and the  tax cut. as a result, the federal budget deficit increased by almost  percent, to nearly  trillion in . under trump, the u.s. national debt increased by  percent, reaching . trillion by the end of his term, and the u.s. debttogdp ratio hit a postworld war ii high. trump also failed to deliver the  trillion infrastructure spending plan on which he had campaigned.trump is the only modern u.s. president to leave office with a smaller workforce than when he took office, by  million people.

trump rejects the scientific consensus on climate change. he reduced the budget for renewable energy research by  percent and reversed obamaera policies directed at curbing climate change. in june , trump announced the withdrawal of the united states from the paris agreement, making the u.s. the only nation in the world to not ratify the agreement.trump aimed to boost the production and exports of fossil fuels. natural gas expanded under trump, but coal continued to decline. trump rolled back more than  federal environmental regulations, including those that curbed greenhouse gas emissions, air and water pollution, and the use of toxic substances. he weakened protections for animals and environmental standards for federal infrastructure projects, and expanded permitted areas for drilling and resource extraction, such as allowing drilling in the arctic refuge. trumps actions while president have been called a very aggressive attempt to rewrite our laws and reinterpret the meaning of environmental protections.

in january , trump signed executive order , which directed that, for every new regulation, federal agencies identify two existing regulations for elimination, though it did not require elimination. he dismantled many federal regulations on health, labor, and the environment, among other topics. trump signed  congressional review act resolutions repealing federal regulations, including a bill that made it easier for severely mentally ill persons to buy guns. during his first six weeks in office, he delayed, suspended, or reversed ninety federal regulations, often after requests by the regulated industries. the institute for policy integrity found that  percent of trumps proposals were blocked by courts or did not prevail over litigation.

during his campaign, trump vowed to repeal and replace the affordable care act . in office, he scaled back the acts implementation through executive orders  and . trump expressed a desire to let obamacare fail; his administration cut the aca enrollment period in half and drastically reduced funding for advertising and other ways to encourage enrollment. trump falsely claimed he saved the coverage of preexisting conditions provided by the aca. in june , the trump administration joined  republicanled states in arguing before the supreme court that the elimination of the financial penalties associated with the individual mandate had rendered the aca unconstitutional. if they had succeeded, it would have eliminated health insurance coverage for up to  million americans. during the  campaign, trump promised to protect funding for medicare and other social safetynet programs, but in january , he suggested he was willing to consider cuts to such programs.in response to the opioid epidemic, trump signed legislation in  to increase funding for drug treatments, but was widely criticized for failing to make a concrete strategy. u.s. opioid overdose deaths declined slightly in , but surged to a record , deaths in .

trump barred organizations that provide abortions or abortion referrals from receiving federal funds. he said he supported traditional marriage but considered the nationwide legality of samesex marriage a settled issue. in march , his administration rolled back key components of the obama administrations workplace protections against discrimination of lgbt people. trumps attempted rollback of antidiscrimination protections for transgender patients in august  was halted by a federal judge after the supreme courts ruling in july had extended employees civil rights protections to gender identity and sexual orientation.trump has said he is opposed to gun control in general, although his views have shifted over time. after several mass shootings during his term, he said he would propose legislation to curtail gun violence, but he abandoned that effort in november . his administration took an antimarijuana position, revoking obamaera policies that provided protections for states that legalized marijuana.trump is a longtime advocate of capital punishment. under his administration, the federal government executed  prisoners, more than in the previous  years combined and after a year moratorium. in , trump said he supported the use of interrogation torture methods such as waterboarding but later appeared to recant this due to the opposition of defense secretary james mattis.

trump granted  requests for clemency, fewer than all presidents since  with the exception of george h. w. bush and george w. bush.

only  of them had been vetted by the justice departments office of the pardon attorney; the others were granted to people with personal or political connections to him, his family, and his allies, or recommended by celebrities.from  to , he pardoned, amongst others, former navy sailor kristian saucier, who was convicted of taking classified photographs of classified areas inside a submarine; and rightwing commentator dinesh dsouza. following a request by celebrity kim kardashian, trump commuted the life sentence of alice marie johnson, who had been convicted of drug trafficking. trump also pardoned or reversed the sentences of three american servicemen convicted or accused of committing war crimes in afghanistan or iraq.in november and december , trump pardoned four blackwater private security contractors convicted of killing iraqi civilians in the  nisour square massacre; whitecollar criminals michael milken and bernard kerik; daughter ivankas fatherinlaw charles kushner; and five people convicted as a result of investigations into russian interference in the  presidential elections. among them were michael flynn; roger stone, whose month sentence for lying to congress, witness tampering, and obstruction he had already commuted in july; and paul manafort.in his last full day in office, trump granted  pardons, including to steve bannon and trump fundraiser elliott broidy, and commuted  sentences.

on june , , federal lawenforcement officials used batons, rubber bullets, pepper spray projectiles, stun grenades, and smoke to remove a largely peaceful crowd of protesters from lafayette square, outside the white house. trump then walked to st. johns episcopal church, where protesters had set a small fire the night before; he posed for photographs holding a bible, with senior administration officials later joining him in photos. trump said on june  that the protesters were cleared because they tried to burn down the church on may  and almost succeeded, describing the church as badly hurt.religious leaders condemned the treatment of protesters and the photo opportunity itself. many retired military leaders and defense officials condemned trumps proposal to use the u.s. military against antipolicebrutality protesters.

trumps proposed immigration policies were a topic of bitter and contentious debate during the campaign. he promised to build a wall on the mexicounited states border to restrict illegal movement and vowed mexico would pay for it. he pledged to deport millions of illegal immigrants residing in the united states, and criticized birthright citizenship for incentivizing anchor babies. as president, he frequently described illegal immigration as an invasion and conflated immigrants with the criminal gang ms, though available research shows undocumented immigrants have a lower crime rate than nativeborn americans.trump attempted to drastically escalate immigration enforcement, including implementing harsher immigration enforcement policies against asylum seekers from central america than any modern u.s. president.from  onward, trump deployed nearly , troops to the u.s.mexico border to stop most central american migrants from seeking u.s. asylum. in , his administration widened the public charge rule to further restrict immigrants who might use government benefits from getting permanent residency via green cards. trump reduced the number of refugees admitted into the u.s. to record lows. when trump took office, the annual limit was ,; trump set a limit of , in the  fiscal year and , in the  fiscal year. additional restrictions implemented by the trump administration caused significant bottlenecks in processing refugee applications, resulting in fewer refugees accepted compared to the allowed limits.

following the  san bernardino attack, trump proposed to ban muslim foreigners from entering the united states until stronger vetting systems could be implemented. he later reframed the proposed ban to apply to countries with a proven history of terrorism.on january , , trump signed executive order , which suspended admission of refugees for  days and denied entry to citizens of iraq, iran, libya, somalia, sudan, syria, and yemen for  days, citing security concerns. the order took effect immediately and without warning, causing confusion and chaos at airports. protests against the ban began at airports the next day. legal challenges to the order resulted in nationwide preliminary injunctions. a march  revised order, which excluded iraq and gave other exemptions, again was blocked by federal judges in three states. in a decision in june , the supreme court ruled that the ban could be enforced on visitors who lack a credible claim of a bona fide relationship with a person or entity in the united states.the temporary order was replaced by presidential proclamation  on september , , which restricted travel from the originally targeted countries except iraq and sudan, and further banned travelers from north korea and chad, along with certain venezuelan officials. after lower courts partially blocked the new restrictions, the supreme court allowed the september version to go into full effect on december , , and ultimately upheld the travel ban in a june  ruling.

the trump administration separated more than , children of migrant families from their parents at the u.s.mexico border, a sharp increase in the number of family separations at the border starting from the summer of . in april , the trump administration announced a zero tolerance policy whereby every adult suspected of illegal entry would be criminally prosecuted. this resulted in family separations, as the migrant adults were put in criminal detention for prosecution, while their children were separated as unaccompanied alien minors. administration officials described the policy as a way to deter illegal immigration.the policy of family separations was unprecedented in previous administrations and sparked public outrage. trump falsely asserted that his administration was merely following the law, blaming democrats, despite the separations being his administrations policy.although trump originally argued that the separations could not be stopped by an executive order, he acceded to intense public objection and signed an executive order on june , , mandating that migrant families be detained together unless there is a concern doing so would pose a risk to the child. on june , , judge dana sabraw concluded that the trump administration had no system in place to keep track of the separated children, nor any effective measures for family communication and reunification; sabraw ordered for the families to be reunited and family separations stopped except in limited circumstances. after the federalcourt order, the trump administration separated more than a thousand migrant children from their families; the aclu contended that the trump administration had abused its discretion and asked sabraw to more narrowly define the circumstances warranting separation.

one of trumps central campaign promises was to build a ,mile  border wall to mexico and have mexico pay for it. by the end of his term, the u.s. had built  miles  km of new primary wall and  miles  km of secondary wall in locations where there had been no barriers and  miles  of primary or secondary border fencing replacing dilapidated or outdated barriers.in , trump refused to sign any appropriations bill from congress unless it allocated . billion in funds for the border wall, resulting in the federal government partially shutting down for  days from december  to january , the longest u.s. government shutdown in history. around , government employees were furloughed or worked without pay. trump and congress ended the shutdown by approving temporary funding that provided delayed payments to government workers but no funds for the wall. the shutdown resulted in an estimated permanent loss of  billion to the economy, according to the congressional budget office. about half of those polled blamed trump for the shutdown, and trumps approval ratings dropped.to prevent another imminent shutdown in february , congress passed and trump signed a funding bill that included . billion for  miles  of bollard border fencing. trump also declared a national emergency concerning the southern border of the united states, intending to divert . billion of funds congress had allocated to other purposes. trump vetoed a joint resolution to overturn the declaration, and the senate voted against a veto override. legal challenges to the diversion of . billion originally meant for the department of defenses drug interdiction efforts and . billion originally meant for military construction were unsuccessful.

trump described himself as a nationalist and his foreign policy as america first. his foreign policy was marked by praise and support of populist, neonationalist, and authoritarian governments. hallmarks of foreign relations during trumps tenure included unpredictability and uncertainty, a lack of a consistent foreign policy, and strained and sometimes antagonistic relationships with the u.s.s european allies. he criticized nato allies and privately suggested on multiple occasions that the united states should withdraw from the alliance.

trump withdrew the u.s. from the transpacific partnership  negotiations, imposed tariffs on steel and aluminum imports, and launched a trade war with china by sharply increasing tariffs on  categories  of chinese goods imported into the u.s. while trump said that import tariffs are paid by china into the u.s. treasury, they are paid by american companies that import goods from china. although he pledged during the campaign to significantly reduce the u.s.s large trade deficits, the trade deficit in july , during the covid pandemic, was the largest monthly deficit since july . following a  renegotiation, the united statesmexicocanada agreement  became effective in july  as the successor to nafta.

the trump administration watered down the toughest penalties the u.s. had imposed on russian entities after its  annexation of crimea. trump withdrew the u.s. from the intermediaterange nuclear forces treaty, citing alleged russian noncompliance, and supported a potential return of russia to the g.trump repeatedly praised and rarely criticized russian president vladimir putin but opposed some actions of the russian government. after he met putin at the helsinki summit in july , trump drew bipartisan criticism for accepting putins denial of russian interference in the  presidential election, rather than accepting the findings of u.s. intelligence agencies. trump did not discuss alleged russian bounties offered to taliban fighters for attacking american soldiers in afghanistan with putin, saying both that he doubted the intelligence and that he was not briefed on it.

before and during his presidency, trump repeatedly accused china of taking unfair advantage of the u.s. as president, trump launched a trade war against china that was widely characterized as a failure, sanctioned huawei for its alleged ties to iran, significantly increased visa restrictions on chinese students and scholars, and classified china as a currency manipulator. trump also juxtaposed verbal attacks on china with praise of chinese communist party leader xi jinping, which was attributed to trade war negotiations with the leader. after initially praising china for its handling of the covid pandemic, he began a campaign of criticism over its response starting in march .trump said he resisted punishing china for its human rights abuses against ethnic minorities in the northwestern xinjiang region for fear of jeopardizing trade negotiations. in july , the trump administration imposed sanctions and visa restrictions against senior chinese officials, in response to expanded mass detention camps holding more than a million of the countrys uyghur muslim ethnic minority.

in , when north koreas nuclear weapons were increasingly seen as a serious threat, trump escalated his rhetoric, warning that north korean aggression would be met with fire and fury like the world has never seen. in , trump declared that he wanted north koreas complete denuclearization, and engaged in namecalling with leader kim jong un.after this period of tension, trump and kim exchanged at least  letters in which the two men described a warm personal friendship. trump met kim three times in singapore in , in hanoi in , and in the korean demilitarized zone in . trump became the first sitting u.s. president to meet a north korean leader or to set foot on north korean soil. trump also lifted some u.s. sanctions against north korea.however, no denuclearization agreement was reached, and talks in october  broke down after one day. while conducting no nuclear tests since , north korea continued to build up its arsenal of nuclear weapons and ballistic missiles.

u.s. troop numbers in afghanistan increased from , in january  to , a year later, reversing trumps preelection position critical of further involvement in afghanistan. in february , the trump administration signed a conditional peace agreement with the taliban, which called for the withdrawal of foreign troops in  months contingent on a guarantee from the taliban that afghan soil will not be used by terrorists with aims to attack the united states or its allies and for the u.s. to seek the release of , taliban imprisoned by the afghan government. by the end of trumps term, , taliban had been released, and, despite the taliban continuing attacks on afghan forces and integrating alqaeda members into its leadership, u.s. troops had been reduced to ,.

trump supported many of the policies of israeli prime minister benjamin netanyahu. under trump, the u.s. recognized jerusalem as the capital of israel and israeli sovereignty over the golan heights, leading to international condemnation including from the united nations general assembly, the european union, and the arab league.

trump actively supported the saudi arabianled intervention in yemen against the houthis and in  signed a  billion agreement to sell arms to saudi arabia, in , the u.s. provided limited intelligence and logistical support for the intervention. following the  attack on saudi oil facilities, which the u.s. and saudi arabia blamed on iran, trump approved the deployment of , additional u.s. troops, including fighter squadrons, two patriot batteries, and a terminal high altitude area defense system , to saudi arabia and the united arab emirates.

trump ordered missile strikes in april  and in april  against the assad regime in syria, in retaliation for the khan shaykhun and douma chemical attacks, respectively.in december , trump declared we have won against isis, contradicting department of defense assessments, and ordered the withdrawal of all troops from syria. the next day, mattis resigned in protest, calling his decision an abandonment of the u.s.s kurdish allies who played a key role in fighting isis. one week after his announcement, trump said he would not approve any extension of the american deployment in syria.

in october , after trump spoke to turkish president recep tayyip erdoan, u.s. troops in northern syria were withdrawn from the area and turkey invaded northern syria, attacking and displacing americanallied kurds in the area. later that month, the u.s. house of representatives, in a rare bipartisan vote of  to , condemned trumps withdrawal of u.s. troops from syria, for abandoning u.s. allies, undermining the struggle against isis, and spurring a humanitarian catastrophe.

after an iranian missile test on january , , and houthi attacks on saudi warships, the trump administration sanctioned  companies and  individuals suspected of being involved in irans missile program. in may , trump withdrew the united states from the joint comprehensive plan of action , the  agreement between iran, the u.s., and five other countries that lifted most economic sanctions against iran in return for iran agreeing to restrictions on its nuclear program. analysts determined that, after the united statess withdrawal, iran moved closer to developing a nuclear weapon.on january , , trump ordered a u.s. airstrike that killed iranian general qasem soleimani, who had planned nearly every significant operation by iranian forces over the past two decades. trump threatened to hit  iranian sites if iran retaliated. on january , iran retaliated with ballistic missile strikes against two u.s. airbases in iraq, leveling the bases. dozens of soldiers sustained traumatic brain injuries. their injuries were downplayed by trump, and they were initially denied purple hearts and the special benefits accorded to its recipients. on the same day, amid the heightened tensions between the united states and iran, iran accidentally shot down ukraine international airlines flight  after takeoff from tehran airport.in august , the trump administration unsuccessfully attempted to trigger a mechanism that was part of the agreement that would have led to the return of u.n. sanctions against iran.

the trump administration had a high turnover of personnel, particularly among white house staff. by the end of trumps first year in office,  percent of his original staff had resigned, been fired, or been reassigned. as of early july ,  percent of trumps senior aides had left and  staffers had left in the previous year. both figures set a record for recent presidentsmore change in the first  months than his four immediate predecessors saw in their first two years. notable early departures included national security advisor flynn , and press secretary sean spicer. close personal aides to trump including bannon, hope hicks, john mcentee, and keith schiller quit or were forced out. some, including hicks and mcentee, later returned to the white house in different posts. trump publicly disparaged several of his former top officials, calling them incompetent, stupid, or crazy.trump had four white house chiefs of staff, marginalizing or pushing out several. reince priebus was replaced after seven months by retired marine general john f. kelly. kelly resigned in december  after a tumultuous tenure in which his influence waned, and trump subsequently disparaged him. kelly was succeeded by mick mulvaney as acting chief of staff; he was replaced in march  by mark meadows.on may , , trump dismissed fbi director james comey. while initially attributing this action to comeys conduct in the investigation about hillary clintons emails, trump said a few days later that he was concerned with comeys roles in the ongoing trumprussia investigations, and that he had intended to fire comey earlier. at a private conversation in february, trump said he hoped comey would drop the investigation into flynn. in march and april, trump asked comey to lift the cloud impairing his ability to act by saying publicly that the fbi was not investigating him.turnover was relatively high within the trump cabinet. trump lost three of his  original cabinet members within his first year. health and human services secretary tom price was forced to resign in september  due to excessive use of private charter jets and military aircraft. environmental protection agency administrator scott pruitt resigned in  and secretary of the interior ryan zinke in january  amid multiple investigations into their conduct.trump was slow to appoint secondtier officials in the executive branch, saying many of the positions are unnecessary. in october , there were still hundreds of subcabinet positions without a nominee. by january , , of  key positions,  had been filled  and trump had no nominee for  .

trump appointed  article iii judges, including  to the courts of appeals and three to the supreme court neil gorsuch, brett kavanaugh, and amy coney barrett. trumps supreme court nominees were noted as having politically shifted the supreme court to the right. in the  campaign, trump pledged that roe v. wade would be overturned automatically if he were elected and provided the opportunity to appoint two or three prolife justices. trump later took credit when roe was overturned in dobbs v. jackson womens health organization; all three of his supreme court nominees voted with the majority.trump disparaged courts and judges he disagreed with, often in personal terms, and questioned the judiciarys constitutional authority. trumps attacks on the courts drew rebukes from observers, including sitting federal judges, concerned about the effect of trumps statements on the judicial independence and public confidence in the judiciary.

in december , covid erupted in wuhan, china; the sarscov virus spread worldwide within weeks. the first confirmed case in the u.s. was reported on january , . the outbreak was officially declared a public health emergency by health and human services  secretary alex azar on january , .trumps public statements on covid were at odds with his private statements. in february  trump publicly asserted that the outbreak in the u.s. was less deadly than influenza, was very much under control, and would soon be over. at the same time he acknowledged the opposite in a private conversation with bob woodward. in march , trump privately told woodward that he was deliberately playing it down in public so as not to create panic.

trump was slow to address the spread of the disease, initially dismissing the threat and ignoring persistent public health warnings and calls for action from health officials within his administration and secretary azar. throughout january and february he focused on economic and political considerations of the outbreak, and largely ignored the danger. by midmarch, most global financial markets had severely contracted in response to the emerging pandemic.on march , trump signed the coronavirus preparedness and response supplemental appropriations act into law, which provided . billion in emergency funding for federal agencies. on march , the world health organization  recognized the spread of covid as a pandemic, and trump announced partial travel restrictions for most of europe, effective march . that same day, he gave his first serious assessment of the virus in a nationwide oval office address, calling the outbreak horrible but a temporary moment and saying there was no financial crisis. on march , he declared a national emergency, freeing up federal resources. trump falsely claimed that anybody that wants a test can get a test, despite the availability of tests being severely limited.in september , the trump administration terminated united states agency for international developments predict program, a  million epidemiological research program initiated in  to provide early warning of pandemics abroad. the program trained scientists in sixty foreign laboratories to detect and respond to viruses that have the potential to cause pandemics. one such laboratory was the wuhan lab that first identified the virus that causes covid. after revival in april , the program was given two month extensions to help fight covid in the u.s. and other countries.on april , trump signed an executive order restricting some forms of immigration to the united states. in late spring and early summer, with infections and death counts continuing to rise, he adopted a strategy of blaming the states for the growing pandemic, rather than accepting that his initial assessments of the course of the pandemic were overly optimistic or his failure to provide presidential leadership.

trump established the white house coronavirus task force on january , . beginning in midmarch, trump held a daily task force press conference, joined by medical experts and other administration officials, sometimes disagreeing with them by promoting unproven treatments. trump was the main speaker at the briefings, where he praised his own response to the pandemic, frequently criticized rival presidential candidate joe biden, and denounced the press. on march , he acknowledged for the first time that the pandemic was not under control and that months of disruption to daily lives and a recession might occur. his repeated use of the terms chinese virus and china virus to describe covid drew criticism from health experts.by early april, as the pandemic worsened and amid criticism of his administrations response, trump refused to admit any mistakes in his handling of the outbreak, instead blaming the media, democratic state governors, the previous administration, china, and the world health organization . the daily coronavirus task force briefings ended in late april, after a briefing at which trump suggested the dangerous idea of injecting a disinfectant to treat covid; the comment was widely condemned by medical professionals.in early may, trump proposed the phaseout of the coronavirus task force and its replacement with another group centered on reopening the economy. amid a backlash, trump said the task force would indefinitely continue. by the end of may, the coronavirus task forces meetings were sharply reduced.

prior to the pandemic, trump criticized the world health organization  and other international bodies, which he asserted were taking advantage of u.s. aid. his administrations proposed  federal budget, released in february, proposed reducing who funding by more than half. in may and april, trump accused the who of severely mismanaging and covering up the spread of the coronavirus and alleged without evidence that the organization was under chinese control and had enabled the chinese governments concealment of the origins of the pandemic. he then announced that he was withdrawing funding for the organization. trumps criticisms and actions regarding the who were seen as attempts to distract attention from his own mishandling of the pandemic. in july , trump announced the formal withdrawal of the united states from the who effective july . the decision was widely condemned by health and government officials as shortsighted, senseless, and dangerous.

in june and july, trump said several times that the u.s. would have fewer cases of coronavirus if it did less testing, that having a large number of reported cases makes us look bad. the cdc guideline at the time was that any person exposed to the virus should be quickly identified and tested even if they are not showing symptoms, because asymptomatic people can still spread the virus. in august  the cdc quietly lowered its recommendation for testing, advising that people who have been exposed to the virus, but are not showing symptoms, do not necessarily need a test. the change in guidelines was made by hhs political appointees under trump administration pressure, against the wishes of cdc scientists. the day after this political interference was reported, the testing guideline was changed back to its original recommendation, stressing that anyone who has been in contact with an infected person should be tested.

in april , republicanconnected groups organized antilockdown protests against the measures state governments were taking to combat the pandemic; trump encouraged the protests on twitter, even though the targeted states did not meet the trump administrations own guidelines for reopening. in april , he first supported, then later criticized, georgia governor brian kemps plan to reopen some nonessential businesses. throughout the spring he increasingly pushed for ending the restrictions as a way to reverse the damage to the countrys economy.trump often refused to wear a face mask at public events, contrary to his own administrations april  guidance that americans should wear masks in public and despite nearly unanimous medical consensus that masks are important to preventing the spread of the virus. by june, trump had said masks were a doubleedged sword; ridiculed biden for wearing masks; continually emphasized that maskwearing was optional; and suggested that wearing a mask was a political statement against him personally. trumps contradiction of medical recommendations weakened national efforts to mitigate the pandemic.despite record numbers of covid cases in the u.s. from midjune onward and an increasing percentage of positive test results, trump largely continued to downplay the pandemic, including his false claim in early july  that  percent of covid cases are totally harmless. he also began insisting that all states should open schools to inperson education in the fall despite a july spike in reported cases.

trump repeatedly pressured federal health agencies to take actions he favored, such as approving unproven treatments or speeding up the approval of vaccines. trump administration political appointees at hhs sought to control cdc communications to the public that undermined trumps claims that the pandemic was under control. cdc resisted many of the changes, but increasingly allowed hhs personnel to review articles and suggest changes before publication. trump alleged without evidence that fda scientists were part of a deep state opposing him, and delaying approval of vaccines and treatments to hurt him politically.

on october , , trump tweeted that he had tested positive for covid. his wife, their son barron, and numerous staff members and visitors also became infected.later that day trump was hospitalized at walter reed national military medical center, reportedly due to labored breathing and a fever. he was treated with antiviral and experimental antibody drugs and a steroid. he returned to the white house on october , still struggling with the disease. during and after his treatment he continued to downplay the virus. in , it was revealed that his condition had been far more serious; he had dangerously low blood oxygen levels, a high fever, and lung infiltrates, indicating a severe case of the disease.

by july , trumps handling of the covid pandemic had become a major issue for the  presidential election. biden sought to make the pandemic the central issue of the election. polls suggested voters blamed trump for his pandemic response and disbelieved his rhetoric concerning the virus, with an ipsos/abc news poll indicating  percent of respondents disapproved of his pandemic response. in the final months of the campaign, trump repeatedly claimed that the u.s. was rounding the turn in managing the pandemic, despite increasing numbers of reported cases and deaths. a few days before the november  election, the united states reported more than , cases in a single day for the first time.

after he assumed office, trump was the subject of increasing justice department and congressional scrutiny, with investigations covering his election campaign, transition, and inauguration, actions taken during his presidency, along with his private businesses, personal taxes, and charitable foundation. there were  investigations of trump, including ten federal criminal investigations, eight state and local investigations, and twelve congressional investigations.in april , the house oversight committee issued subpoenas seeking financial details from trumps banks, deutsche bank and capital one, and his accounting firm, mazars usa. trump then sued the banks, mazars, and committee chair elijah cummings to prevent the disclosures. in may, dc district court judge amit mehta ruled that mazars must comply with the subpoena, and judge edgardo ramos of the southern district court of new york ruled that the banks must also comply. trumps attorneys appealed the rulings. in september , the committee and trump agreed to a settlement about mazars, and the accounting firm began turning over documents.

during the  presidential election campaign, american media, inc. , the parent company of the national enquirer, and a company set up by cohen paid playboy model karen mcdougal and adult film actress stormy daniels for keeping silent about their alleged affairs with trump between  and . cohen pleaded guilty in  to breaking campaign finance laws, saying he had arranged both payments at the direction of trump to influence the presidential election. trump denied the affairs and claimed he was not aware of cohens payment to daniels, but he reimbursed him in . federal prosecutors asserted that trump had been involved in discussions regarding nondisclosure payments as early as . court documents showed that the fbi believed trump was directly involved in the payment to daniels, based on calls he had with cohen in october . federal prosecutors closed the investigation in , but the manhattan district attorney subpoenaed the trump organization and ami for records related to the payments and trump and the trump organization for eight years of tax returns. in november , the new york times reported that manhattan prosecutors were newly optimistic about building a case against trump.

in january , american intelligence agenciesthe cia, the fbi, and the nsa, represented by the director of national intelligencejointly stated with high confidence that the russian government interfered in the  presidential election to favor the election of trump. in march , fbi director james comey told congress, the fbi, as part of our counterintelligence mission, is investigating the russian governments efforts to interfere in the  presidential election. that includes investigating the nature of any links between individuals associated with the trump campaign and the russian government, and whether there was any coordination between the campaign and russias efforts. many suspicious links between trump associates and russian officials and spies were discovered and the relationships between russians and team trump were widely reported by the press.manafort, one of trumps campaign managers, worked from december  to february  to help prorussian politician viktor yanukovych win the ukrainian presidency. other trump associates, including flynn and stone, were connected to russian officials. russian agents were overheard during the campaign saying they could use manafort and flynn to influence trump. members of trumps campaign and later his white house staff, particularly flynn, were in contact with russian officials both before and after the november election. on december , , flynn talked with russian ambassador sergey kislyak about sanctions that were imposed that same day; flynn later resigned in the midst of controversy over whether he misled pence. trump told kislyak and sergei lavrov in may  he was unconcerned about russian interference in u.s. elections.trump and his allies promoted a conspiracy theory that ukraine, rather than russia, interfered in the  electionwhich was also promoted by russia to frame ukraine. after the democratic national committee was hacked, trump first claimed it withheld its server from the fbi ; second, that crowdstrike, the company that investigated the servers, was ukrainebased and ukrainianowned ; and third that the server was hidden in ukraine. members of the trump administration spoke out against the conspiracy theories.

in july , the fbi launched an investigation, codenamed crossfire hurricane, into possible links between russia and the trump campaign. after trump fired fbi director james comey in may , the fbi opened a counterintelligence investigation into trumps personal and business dealings with russia. crossfire hurricane was transferred to the mueller investigation, but deputy attorney general rod rosenstein ended the investigation into trumps direct ties to russia while giving the bureau the false impression that mueller would pursue the matter.

in may , deputy attorney general rod rosenstein appointed robert mueller, a former director of the fbi, special counsel for the department of justice , ordering him to examine any links and/or coordination between the russian government and the trump campaign. he privately told mueller to restrict the investigation to criminal matters in connection with russias  election interference. the special counsel also investigated whether trumps dismissal of james comey as fbi director constituted obstruction of justice and the trump campaigns possible ties to saudi arabia, the united arab emirates, turkey, qatar, israel, and china. trump sought to fire mueller and shut down the investigation multiple times but backed down after his staff objected or after changing his mind.in march , mueller concluded his investigation and gave his report to attorney general william barr. two days later, barr sent a letter to congress purporting to summarize the reports main conclusions. a federal court, as well as mueller himself, said barr mischaracterized the investigations conclusions and, in so doing, confused the public. trump repeatedly and falsely claimed that the investigation exonerated him; the mueller report expressly stated that it did not exonerate him.a redacted version of the report was publicly released in april . it found that russia interfered in  to favor trumps candidacy and hinder clintons. despite numerous links between the russian government and the trump campaign, the report found that the prevailing evidence did not establish that trump campaign members conspired or coordinated with russian interference. the report revealed sweeping russian interference and detailed how trump and his campaign welcomed and encouraged it, believing they would benefit electorally from information stolen and released through russian efforts.the report also detailed multiple acts of potential obstruction of justice by trump but did not make a traditional prosecutorial judgment on whether trump broke the law, suggesting that congress should make such a determination. investigators decided they could not apply an approach that could potentially result in a judgment that the president committed crimes as an office of legal counsel opinion stated that a sitting president could not be indicted, and investigators would not accuse him of a crime when he cannot clear his name in court. the report concluded that congress, having the authority to take action against a president for wrongdoing, may apply the obstruction laws. the house of representatives subsequently launched an impeachment inquiry following the trumpukraine scandal, but did not pursue an article of impeachment related to the mueller investigation.several trump associates pleaded guilty or were convicted in connection with muellers investigation and related cases, including manafort, convicted on eight felony counts, deputy campaign manager rick gates, foreign policy advisor papadopoulos, and flynn. cohen pleaded guilty to lying to congress about trumps  attempts to reach a deal with russia to build a trump tower in moscow. cohen said he had made the false statements on behalf of trump, who was identified as individual in the court documents. in february , stone was sentenced to  months in prison for lying to congress and witness tampering regarding his attempts to learn more about hacked democratic emails during the  election. the sentencing judge said stone was prosecuted for covering up for the president.

in august , a whistleblower filed a complaint with the inspector general of the intelligence community about a july  phone call between trump and president of ukraine volodymyr zelenskyy, during which trump had pressured zelenskyy to investigate crowdstrike and democratic presidential candidate biden and his son hunter. the whistleblower said that the white house had attempted to cover up the incident and that the call was part of a wider campaign by the trump administration and trump attorney rudy giuliani that may have included withholding financial aid from ukraine in july  and canceling pences may  ukraine trip.house speaker nancy pelosi initiated a formal impeachment inquiry on september . trump then confirmed that he withheld military aid from ukraine, offering contradictory reasons for the decision. on september , the trump administration released a memorandum of the phone call which confirmed that, after zelenskyy mentioned purchasing american antitank missiles, trump asked him to discuss investigating biden and his son with giuliani and barr. the testimony of multiple administration officials and former officials confirmed that this was part of a broader effort to further trumps personal interests by giving him an advantage in the upcoming presidential election. in october, william b. taylor jr., the charg daffaires for ukraine, testified before congressional committees that soon after arriving in ukraine in june , he found that zelenskyy was being subjected to pressure directed by trump and led by giuliani. according to taylor and others, the goal was to coerce zelenskyy into making a public commitment investigating the company that employed hunter biden, as well as rumors about ukrainian involvement in the  u.s. presidential election. he said it was made clear that until zelenskyy made such an announcement, the administration would not release scheduled military aid for ukraine and not invite zelenskyy to the white house.on december , the house judiciary committee voted along party lines to pass two articles of impeachment one for abuse of power and one for obstruction of congress. after debate, the house of representatives impeached trump on both articles on december .

during the trial in january , the house impeachment managers presented their case for three days. they cited evidence to support charges of abuse of power and obstruction of congress, and asserted that trumps actions were exactly what the founding fathers had in mind when they created the constitutions impeachment process.

responding over the next three days, trumps lawyers did not deny the facts as presented in the charges but said trump had not broken any laws or obstructed congress. they argued that the impeachment was constitutionally and legally invalid because trump was not charged with a crime and that abuse of power is not an impeachable offense.on january , the senate voted against allowing subpoenas for witnesses or documents;  republicans formed the majority for this vote. the impeachment trial was the first in u.s. history without witness testimony.trump was acquitted of both charges by the republican majority,  on abuse of power and  on obstruction of congress. senator mitt romney was the only republican who voted to convict trump on one charge, the abuse of power. following his acquittal, trump fired impeachment witnesses and other political appointees and career officials he deemed insufficiently loyal.

breaking with precedent, trump filed to run for a second term with the fec within a few hours of assuming the presidency. he held his first reelection rally less than a month after taking office and officially became the republican nominee in august .in his first two years in office, trumps reelection committee reported raising . million and began  with . million in cash. by july , the trump campaign and the republican party had raised . billion and spent  million, losing their cash advantage over biden. the cash shortage forced the campaign to scale back advertising spending.trump campaign advertisements focused on crime, claiming that cities would descend into lawlessness if biden won the presidency. trump repeatedly misrepresented bidens positions and shifted to appeals to racism.

starting in spring , trump began to sow doubts about the election, claiming without evidence that the election would be rigged and that the expected widespread use of mail balloting would produce massive election fraud. in july, trump raised the idea of delaying the election. when, in august, the house of representatives voted for a  billion grant to the u.s. postal service for the expected surge in mail voting, trump blocked funding, saying he wanted to prevent any increase in voting by mail. he repeatedly refused to say whether he would accept the results of the election and commit to a peaceful transition of power if he lost.biden won the election on november , receiving . million votes  to trumps . million  and  electoral college votes to trumps .

at  a.m. the morning after the election, with the results still unclear, trump declared victory. after biden was projected the winner days later, trump stated that this election is far from over and baselessly alleged election fraud. trump and his allies filed many legal challenges to the results, which were rejected by at least  judges in both the state and federal courts, including by federal judges appointed by trump himself, finding no factual or legal basis. trumps unsubstantiated allegations of widespread voting fraud were also refuted by state election officials. after cybersecurity and infrastructure security agency  director chris krebs contradicted trumps fraud allegations, trump dismissed him on november . on december , the u.s. supreme court declined to hear a case from the texas attorney general that asked the court to overturn the election results in four states won by biden.trump withdrew from public activities in the weeks following the election. he initially blocked government officials from cooperating in bidens presidential transition. after three weeks, the administrator of the general services administration declared biden the apparent winner of the election, allowing the disbursement of transition resources to his team. trump still did not formally concede while claiming he recommended the gsa begin transition protocols.the electoral college formalized bidens victory on december . from november to january, trump repeatedly sought help to overturn the results of the election, personally pressuring various republican local and state officeholders, republican state and federal legislators, the justice department, and vice president pence, urging various actions such as replacing presidential electors, or a request for georgia officials to find votes and announce a recalculated result. on february , , georgia prosecutors opened a criminal investigation into trumps efforts to subvert the election in georgia.trump did not attend bidens inauguration, leaving washington for florida hours before.

in december , newsweek reported the pentagon was on red alert, and ranking officers had discussed what they would do if trump decided to declare martial law. the pentagon responded with quotes from defense leaders that the military has no role to play in the outcome of elections.when trump moved supporters into positions of power at the pentagon after the november  election, chairman of the joint chiefs of staff mark milley and cia director gina haspel became concerned about the threat of a possible coup attempt or military action against china or iran. milley insisted that he should be consulted about any military orders from trump, including the use of nuclear weapons, and he instructed haspel and nsa director paul nakasone to monitor developments closely.

on january , , while congressional certification of the presidential election results was taking place in the united states capitol, trump held a noon rally at the ellipse, washington, d.c.. he called for the election result to be overturned and urged his supporters to take back our country by marching to the capitol to show strength and fight like hell. many supporters did, joining a crowd already there. around  p.m. the mob broke into the building, disrupting certification and causing the evacuation of congress. during the violence, trump watched tv and posted messages on twitter without asking the rioters to disperse. at  p.m., trump tweeted that the rioters should go home with love  in peace, calling them great patriots and very special and repeating that the election was stolen from him. after the mob was removed from the capitol, congress reconvened and confirmed the biden election win in the early hours of the following morning. according to the department of justice, more than  police officers were injured, and five people died.in march , trump collaborated with incarcerated rioters on a song to benefit the prisoners, and, in june, he said that, if elected, he would pardon a large number of them.

on january , , an article of impeachment charging trump with incitement of insurrection against the u.s. government was introduced to the house. the house voted  to impeach trump on january , making him the first u.s. president to be impeached twice. ten republicans voted for the impeachmentthe most members of a party ever to vote to impeach a president of their own party.on february , following a fiveday senate trial, trump was acquitted when the senate voted  for conviction, falling ten votes short of the twothirds majority required to convict; seven republicans joined every democrat in voting to convict, the most bipartisan support in any senate impeachment trial of a president or former president. most republicans voted to acquit trump, although some held him responsible but felt the senate did not have jurisdiction over former presidents ; included in the latter group was mitch mcconnell.

at the end of his term, trump went to live at his maralago club. as provided for by the former presidents act, he established an office there to handle his postpresidential activities.trumps false claims concerning the  election were commonly referred to as the big lie in the press and by his critics. in may , trump and his supporters attempted to coopt the term, using it to refer to the election itself. the republican party used trumps false election narrative to justify the imposition of new voting restrictions in its favor. as late as july , trump was still pressuring state legislators to overturn the  election by rescinding the states electoral votes for biden.trump resumed his campaignstyle rallies with an minute speech at the annual north carolina republican party convention on june , . on june , he held his first public rally since the january  rally that preceded the riot at the capitol.unlike other former presidents, trump continued to dominate his party; he has been compared to a modernday party boss. he continued fundraising, raising more than twice as much as the republican party itself, hinted at a third candidacy, and profited from fundraisers many republican candidates held at maralago. much of his focus was on the people in charge of elections and how elections are run. in the  midterm elections he endorsed over  candidates for various offices, most of whom supported his false claim that the  presidential election was stolen from him. a majority of candidates endorsed by him won in republican primary elections.trump registered a new company in february . trump media  technology group  was formed for providing social networking services to customers in the united states. in october , trump announced the planned merger of tmtg with digital world acquisition, a specialpurpose acquisition company . a main backer of the spac is chinabased financier arc group, who was reportedly involved in setting up the proposed merger. the transaction is under investigation by the u.s. securities and exchange commission.in february , tmtg launched truth social, a twitterlike socialmedia platform. as of march , trump media, which had taken  million from russiaconnected entities, was being investigated by federal prosecutors for possible money laundering.

trump is the subject of numerous probes into his actions and business dealings before, during and after his presidency. in february , the district attorney for fulton county, georgia, fani willis, announced a criminal probe into trumps phone calls to georgia secretary of state brad raffensperger. the new york state attorney generals office is conducting criminal investigations into trumps business activities in conjunction with the manhattan district attorneys office. by may , a special grand jury was considering indictments. in july , new york prosecutors charged the trump organization with a  year scheme to defraud the government. in january , the organizations chief financial officer, allen weisselberg, was sentenced to five months in jail and five years probation for tax fraud after a plea deal.

when trump left the white house in january , he took government documents and material with him to maralago. by may , the national archives and records administration , the federal agency that preserves government records, realized that important documents had not been turned over to them at the end of trumps term and asked his office to locate them. in january , they retrieved  boxes of white house records from maralago. nara later informed the department of justice that some of the retrieved documents were classified material. the justice department began an investigation in april  and convened a grand jury. the justice department sent trump a subpoena for additional material on may . on june , justice department officials visited maralago and received some classified documents from trumps lawyers. one of the lawyers signed a statement affirming that all material marked as classified had been returned to the government. later that month an additional subpoena was sent requesting surveillance footage from maralago, which was provided.on august , , fbi agents searched trumps residence, office, and storage areas at maralago to recover government documents and material trump had taken with him when he left office in violation of the presidential records act, reportedly including some related to nuclear weapons. the search warrant, authorized by u.s. attorney general merrick garland and approved by a federal magistrate judge, and the written inventory of the seized items were made public on august . the text of the search warrant indicates an investigation of potential violations of the espionage act and obstruction of justice laws. the items taken in the search included  sets of classified documents, four of them tagged as top secret and one as top secret/sci, the highest level of classification.on november , , garland appointed a special counsel, federal prosecutor jack smith, to oversee the federal criminal investigations into trump retaining government property at maralago and examining trumps role in the events leading up to the january , , capitol attack.

on december , , the united states house select committee on the january  attack recommended criminal charges against trump for obstructing an official proceeding, conspiracy to defraud the united states, and inciting or assisting an insurrection.

on march , , a new york grand jury indicted trump on  felony counts of falsifying business records. on april , he surrendered and was arrested and arraigned; he pleaded not guilty on all counts and was released. the trial is scheduled to begin on march , .

on june , the justice department indicted trump in miami federal court for  counts of willfully retaining national defense information under the espionage act, one count of making false statements, and, jointly with a personal aide, single counts of conspiracy to obstruct justice, withholding government documents, corruptly concealing records, concealing a document in a federal investigation and scheming to conceal their efforts. trump pleaded not guilty to all charges. in july a superseding indictment added three additional criminal charges, bringing the number of charges in the case to . the trial is scheduled to begin on may , .

on august , a washington, d.c., federal grand jury indicted trump on four counts for his efforts to overturn the  election results. he was charged with conspiring with unnamed coconspirators to defraud the united states, obstruct the certification of the electoral college vote, and deprive people of the civil right to have their votes counted, as well as obstructing an official proceeding. trump pleaded not guilty to all charges. the case is slated to go to trial on march , .

on august , a fulton county, georgia, grand jury indicted trump and  allies for racketeering  among other felonies  after trump campaign officials accessed voting machines with election officials. on august , trump surrendered, was placed under arrest and processed at fulton county jail, and released on bail. he posted the mug shot on twitter and on his campaign website with a fundraising pitch. on august , he pleaded not guilty.

in , four investors filed a federal class action lawsuit against trump, the trump organization, and his three eldest children for not disclosing that they were paid by acn, inc., when they recommended the company as a sound investment on the apprentice. in july , a district judge permitted the lawsuit to proceed with statelevel claims of fraud, false advertising, and unfair competition. the case is slated to go to trial on january , .

in september , the new york state attorney general filed a civil fraud case against trump, his three oldest children, and the trump organization. in december , the attorney generals office had subpoenaed trump to produce documents related to his business. in april , a new york state judge held trump in contempt of court for failing to comply with the subpoena and imposed a fine of , per day until he does. trump was deposed in august and invoked his fifth amendment right against selfincrimination more than  times. the judge presiding over the civil suit ruled in september  that trump, his adult sons and the trump organization repeatedly committed fraud and ordered their new york business certificates canceled and their business entities sent into receivership for dissolution.

in may , a new york jury in a federal lawsuit brought by journalist e. jean carroll found trump liable for sexual abuse and defamation and ordered him to pay her  million. trump asked the district court for a new trial or a reduction of the damage award, arguing that the jury had not found him liable for rape, and also, in a separate lawsuit, countersued carroll for defamation. the judge for the two lawsuits ruled against trump in july and august. trump appealed both decisions to an appeals court. the trial in the defamation case is scheduled to begin on january , .

on november , , trump announced his candidacy for the  united states presidential election and set up a fundraising account. in march , the campaign began diverting  percent of the donations to trumps leadership pac which had paid  million for his legal bills by june .

cspan, which has surveyed presidential historians on presidential leadership each time the administration changed since , ranked trump fourthlowest overall in their presidential historians survey , with trump rated lowest in the leadership characteristics categories for moral authority and administrative skills. the siena college research institute  has surveyed presidential scholars during the second year of the first term of each president since . in their  survey, scri ranked trump rd out of  presidents. he was ranked last on background, integrity, intelligence, foreign policy accomplishments, and executive appointments, and second to last on ability to compromise, executive ability, and present overall view. he was ranked near the bottom in all categories except for luck, willingness to take risks, and party leadership.

trump was the only president to never reach a  percent approval rating in the gallup poll dating to . his approval ratings showed a recordhigh partisan gap  percent among republicans and  percent among democrats. until september , the ratings were unusually stable, reaching a high of  percent and a low of  percent. trump finished his term with an approval rating between  percent and  percentthe lowest of any president since modern polling beganand a recordlow average of  percent throughout his presidency.in gallups annual poll asking americans to name the man they admire the most, trump placed second to obama in  and , tied with obama for most admired man in , and was named most admired in . since gallup started conducting the poll in , trump is the first elected president not to be named most admired in his first year in office.a gallup poll in  countries comparing the approval ratings of u.s. leadership between the years  and  found that trump led obama in job approval in only  countries, most of them nondemocracies; approval of u.s. leadership plummeted among allies and g countries. overall ratings were similar to those in the last two years of the george w. bush presidency. by mid, only  percent of international respondents to a nation pew research poll expressed confidence in trump, a lower score than those accorded to russias vladimir putin and chinas xi jinping.

as a candidate and as president, trump frequently made false statements in public speeches and remarks to an extent unprecedented in american politics. his falsehoods became a distinctive part of his political identity.trumps false and misleading statements were documented by factcheckers, including at the washington post, which tallied a total of , false or misleading statements made by trump over his fouryear term. trumps falsehoods increased in frequency over time, rising from about six false or misleading claims per day in his first year as president to  per day in his second year,  per day in his third year, and  per day in his final year.some of trumps falsehoods were inconsequential, such as his claim of the biggest inaugural crowd ever. others had more farreaching effects, such as his promotion of unproven antimalarial drugs as a treatment for covid in a press conference and on twitter. the claims had consequences worldwide, such as a shortage of these drugs in the united states and panicbuying in africa and south asia. other misinformation, such as misattributing a rise in crime in england and wales to the spread of radical islamic terror, served trumps domestic political purposes. as a matter of principle, trump does not apologize for his falsehoods.despite the frequency of trumps falsehoods, the media rarely referred to them as lies. the first time the washington post did so was in august , when it declared that some of trumps misstatements, in particular those concerning hush money paid to stormy daniels and playboy model karen mcdougal, were lies.in , trump was a significant source of disinformation on mailin voting and misinformation on the covid pandemic. his attacks on mailin ballots and other election practices served to weaken public faith in the integrity of the  presidential election, while his disinformation about the pandemic delayed and weakened the national response to it.james pfiffner, professor of policy and government at george mason university, wrote in  that trump lies differently from previous presidents, because he offers egregious false statements that are demonstrably contrary to wellknown facts; these lies are the most important of all trump lies. by calling facts into question, people will be unable to properly evaluate their government, with beliefs or policy irrationally settled by political power; this erodes liberal democracy, wrote pfiffner.

before and throughout his presidency, trump has promoted numerous conspiracy theories, including obama birtherism, the clinton body count conspiracy theory, the conspiracy theory movement qanon, the global warming hoax theory, trump tower wiretapping allegations, a john f. kennedy assassination conspiracy theory involving rafael cruz, linking talk show host joe scarborough to the death of a staffer, alleged foulplay in the death of justice antonin scalia, alleged ukrainian interference in u.s. elections, and that osama bin laden was alive and obama and biden had members of navy seal team  killed. in at least two instances, trump clarified to press that he also believed the conspiracy theory in question.during and since the  presidential election, trump has promoted various conspiracy theories for his defeat including dead people voting, voting machines changing or deleting trump votes, fraudulent mailin voting, throwing out trump votes, and finding suitcases full of biden votes.

research suggests trumps rhetoric caused an increased incidence of hate crimes. during his  campaign, he urged or praised physical attacks against protesters or reporters. numerous defendants investigated or prosecuted for violent acts and hate crimes, including participants of the january , , storming of the u.s. capitol, cited trumps rhetoric in arguing that they were not culpable or should receive a lighter sentence. a nationwide review by abc news in may  identified at least  criminal cases from august  to april  in which trump was invoked in direct connection with violence or threats of violence mostly by white men and primarily against members of minority groups.

trumps social media presence attracted worldwide attention after he joined twitter in . he tweeted frequently during the  election campaign and as president until twitter banned him in the final days of his term. trump often used twitter as a direct means of communication with the public and sidelining of the press. in june , a white house press secretary said that trumps tweets were official presidential statements. trump often announced terminations of administration officials over twitter.after years of criticism for allowing trump to post misinformation and falsehoods, twitter began to tag some of his tweets with factchecking warnings in may . in response, trump tweeted that social media platforms totally silence conservative voices and that he would strongly regulate or close them down. in the days after the storming of the united states capitol, trump was banned from facebook, instagram, twitter and other platforms. the loss of trumps social media presence diminished his ability to shape events and prompted a dramatic decrease in the volume of misinformation shared on twitter. trumps early attempts to reestablish a social media presence were unsuccessful. in february , he launched social media platform truth social where he only attracted a fraction of his twitter following. elon musk, the new owner of twitter, reinstated trumps twitter account in november .

trump sought media attention throughout his career, sustaining a lovehate relationship with the press. in the  campaign, trump benefited from a record amount of free media coverage, elevating his standing in the republican primaries. the new york times writer amy chozick wrote in  that trumps media dominance enthralled the public and created mustsee tv.as a candidate and as president, trump frequently accused the press of bias, calling it the fake news media and the enemy of the people. in , journalist lesley stahl recounted trumps saying he intentionally demeaned and discredited the media so when you write negative stories about me no one will believe you.as president, trump privately and publicly mused about revoking the press credentials of journalists he viewed as critical. his administration moved to revoke the press passes of two white house reporters, which were restored by the courts. in , a member of the foreign press reported many of the same concerns as those of media in the u.s., expressing concern that a normalization process by reporters and media results in an inaccurate characterization of trump. the trump white house held about a hundred formal press briefings in , declining by half during  and to two in .trump also deployed the legal system to intimidate the press. in early , the trump campaign sued the new york times, the washington post, and cnn for defamation in opinion pieces about russian election interference. legal experts said that the lawsuits lacked merit and were not likely to succeed. by march , the lawsuits against the new york times and cnn had been dismissed.

many of trumps comments and actions have been considered racist. in national polling, about half of respondents said that trump is racist; a greater proportion believed that he emboldened racists. several studies and surveys found that racist attitudes fueled trumps political ascent and were more important than economic factors in determining the allegiance of trump voters. racist and islamophobic attitudes are a powerful indicator of support for trump.in , he settled a  department of justice lawsuit that alleged housing discrimination against black renters. he has also been accused of racism for insisting a group of black and latino teenagers were guilty of raping a white woman in the  central park jogger case, even after they were exonerated by dna evidence in . as of , he maintained this position.in , when he was reportedly considering a presidential run, he became the leading proponent of the racist birther conspiracy theory, alleging that barack obama, the first black u.s. president, was not born in the united states. in april, he claimed credit for pressuring the white house to publish the longform birth certificate, which he considered fraudulent, and later said this made him very popular. in september , amid pressure, he acknowledged that obama was born in the u.s. in , he reportedly expressed birther views in private.according to an analysis in political science quarterly, trump made explicitly racist appeals to whites during his  presidential campaign. in particular, his campaign launch speech drew widespread criticism for claiming mexican immigrants were bringing drugs, theyre bringing crime, theyre rapists. his later comments about a mexicanamerican judge presiding over a civil suit regarding trump university were also criticized as racist.

trumps comments on the  farright rally in charlottesville, virginia, condemning this egregious display of hatred, bigotry and violence on many sides and stating that there were very fine people on both sides, were widely criticized as implying a moral equivalence between the white supremacist demonstrators and the counterprotesters.in a january  oval office meeting to discuss immigration legislation, trump reportedly referred to el salvador, haiti, honduras, and african nations as shithole countries. his remarks were condemned as racist.in july , trump tweeted that four democratic congresswomenall from minorities, three of whom are nativeborn americansshould go back to the countries they came from. two days later the house of representatives voted , mostly along party lines, to condemn his racist comments. white nationalist publications and social media sites praised his remarks, which continued over the following days. trump continued to make similar remarks during his  campaign.

trump has a history of insulting and belittling women when speaking to media and on social media. he made lewd comments, demeaned womens looks, and called them names, such as dog, crazed, crying lowlife, face of a pig, or horseface.at least  women publicly accused trump of rape, kissing, and groping without consent; looking under womens skirts; and walking in on naked teenage pageant contestants. trump has denied all of the allegations.in october , two days before the second presidential debate, a  hot mic recording surfaced in which trump was heard bragging about kissing and groping women without their consent, saying that when youre a star, they let you do it. you can do anything. ... grab em by the pussy. the incidents widespread media exposure led to trumps first public apology during the campaign and caused outrage across the political spectrum.

trump has been the subject of parody, comedy, and caricature on television, in films, and in comics. he has been named in hundreds of hip hop songs since the suntil , most of these references cast trump in a positive light, but they turned largely negative after he began running for office.

albert einstein  was a germanborn theoretical physicist who is widely held to be one of the greatest and most influential scientists of all time. best known for developing the theory of relativity, einstein also made important contributions to quantum mechanics, and was thus a central figure in the revolutionary reshaping of the scientific understanding of nature that modern physics accomplished in the first decades of the twentieth century. his massenergy equivalence formula e  mc, which arises from relativity theory, has been called the worlds most famous equation. he received the  nobel prize in physics for his services to theoretical physics, and especially for his discovery of the law of the photoelectric effect, a pivotal step in the development of quantum theory. his work is also known for its influence on the philosophy of science. in a  poll of  leading physicists worldwide by the british journal physics world, einstein was ranked the greatest physicist of all time. his intellectual achievements and originality have made the word einstein broadly synonymous with genius.in , a year sometimes described as his annus mirabilis , einstein published four groundbreaking papers. these outlined a theory of the photoelectric effect, explained brownian motion, introduced his special theory of relativitya theory which addressed the inability of classical mechanics to account satisfactorily for the behavior of the electromagnetic fieldand demonstrated that if the special theory is correct, mass and energy are equivalent to each other. in , he proposed a general theory of relativity that extended his system of mechanics to incorporate gravitation. a cosmological paper that he published the following year laid out the implications of general relativity for the modeling of the structure and evolution of the universe as a whole. the middle part of his career also saw him making important contributions to statistical mechanics and quantum theory. especially notable was his work on the quantum physics of radiation, in which light consists of particles, subsequently called photons.

for much of the last phase of his academic life, einstein worked on two endeavors that proved ultimately unsuccessful. firstly, he fought a long rearguard action against quantum theorys introduction of fundamental randomness into sciences picture of the world, objecting that god does not play dice. secondly, he attempted to devise a unified field theory by generalizing his geometric theory of gravitation to include electromagnetism too. as a result, he became increasingly isolated from the mainstream of modern physics.

born in the german empire, einstein moved to switzerland in , forsaking his german citizenship  the following year. in , at the age of seventeen, he enrolled in the mathematics and physics teaching diploma program at the swiss federal polytechnic school in zrich, graduating in . in , he acquired swiss citizenship, which he kept for the rest of his life. in , he secured a permanent position at the swiss patent office in bern. in , he submitted a successful phd dissertation to the university of zurich. in , he moved to berlin in order to join the prussian academy of sciences and the humboldt university of berlin. in , he became director of the kaiser wilhelm institute for physics; he also became a german citizen again, this time as a subject of the kingdom of prussia. in , while he was visiting the united states, adolf hitler came to power in germany. horrified by the nazi war of extermination against his fellow jews, einstein decided to remain in the us, and was granted american citizenship in . on the eve of world war ii, he endorsed a letter to president franklin d. roosevelt alerting him to the potential german nuclear weapons program and recommending that the us begin similar research. einstein supported the allies but generally viewed the idea of nuclear weapons with great dismay.

albert einstein was born in ulm, in the kingdom of wrttemberg in the german empire, on  march . his parents, secular ashkenazi jews, were hermann einstein, a salesman and engineer, and pauline koch. in , the family moved to munich, where einsteins father and his uncle jakob founded elektrotechnische fabrik j. einstein  cie, a company that manufactured electrical equipment based on direct current.albert attended a catholic elementary school in munich from the age of five. when he was eight, he was transferred to the luitpoldgymnasium  where he received advanced primary and then secondary school education.in , hermann and jakobs company tendered for a contract to install electric lighting in munich, but without successthey lacked the capital that would have been required to update their technology from direct current to the more efficient, alternating current alternative. the failure of their bid forced them to sell their munich factory and search for new opportunities elsewhere. the einstein family moved to italy, first to milan and a few months later to pavia, where they settled in palazzo cornazzani. einstein, then fifteen, stayed behind in munich in order to finish his schooling. his father wanted him to study electrical engineering, but he was a fractious pupil who found the gymnasiums regimen and teaching methods far from congenial. he later wrote that the schools policy of strict rote learning was harmful to creativity. at the end of december , a letter from a doctor persuaded the luitpolds authorities to release him from its care, and he joined his family in pavia. while in italy as a teenager, he wrote an essay entitled on the investigation of the state of the ether in a magnetic field.einstein excelled at physics and mathematics from an early age, and soon acquired the mathematical expertise normally only found in a child several years his senior. he began teaching himself algebra, calculus and euclidean geometry when he was twelve; he made such rapid progress that he discovered an original proof of the pythagorean theorem before his thirteenth birthday. a family tutor, max talmud, said that only a short time after he had given the twelve year old einstein a geometry textbook, the boy had worked through the whole book. he thereupon devoted himself to higher mathematics ... soon the flight of his mathematical genius was so high i could not follow. einstein recorded that he had mastered integral and differential calculus while still just fourteen. his love of algebra and geometry was so great that at twelve, he was already confident that nature could be understood as a mathematical structure.

at thirteen, when his range of enthusiasms had broadened to include music and philosophy, einstein was introduced to kants critique of pure reason. kant became his favorite philosopher; according to his tutor, at the time he was still a child, only thirteen years old, yet kants works, incomprehensible to ordinary mortals, seemed to be clear to him.

in , at the age of sixteen, einstein sat the entrance examination for the federal polytechnic school  in zrich, switzerland. he failed to reach the required standard in the general part of the test, but performed with distinction in physics and mathematics. on the advice of the polytechnics principal, he completed his secondary education at the argovian cantonal school  in aarau, switzerland, graduating in . while lodging in aarau with the family of jost winteler, he fell in love with wintelers daughter, marie. 

in january , with his fathers approval, einstein renounced his citizenship of the german kingdom of wrttemberg in order to avoid conscription into military service. the matura  awarded to him in the september of that year acknowledged him to have performed well across most of the curriculum, allotting him a top grade of  for history, physics, algebra, geometry, and descriptive geometry. at seventeen, he enrolled in the fouryear mathematics and physics teaching diploma program at the federal polytechnic school. marie winteler, a year older than him, took up a teaching post in olsberg, switzerland.the five other polytechnic school freshmen following the same course as einstein included just one woman, a twenty year old serbian, mileva mari. over the next few years, the pair spent many hours discussing their shared interests and learning about topics in physics that the polytechnic schools lectures did not cover. in his letters to mari, einstein confessed that exploring science with her by his side was much more enjoyable than reading a textbook in solitude. eventually the two students became not only friends but also lovers.historians of physics are divided on the question of the extent to which mari contributed to the insights of einsteins annus mirabilis publications. there is at least some evidence that he was influenced by her scientific ideas, but there are scholars who doubt whether her impact on his thought was of any great significance at all.

correspondence between einstein and mari, discovered and published in , revealed that in early , while mari was visiting her parents in novi sad, she gave birth to a daughter, lieserl. when mari returned to switzerland it was without the child, whose fate is uncertain. a letter of einsteins that he wrote in september  suggests that the girl was either given up for adoption or died of scarlet fever in infancy.einstein and mari married in january . in may , their son hans albert was born in bern, switzerland. their son eduard was born in zrich in july . in letters that einstein wrote to marie winteler in the months before eduards arrival, he described his love for his wife as misguided and mourned the missed life that he imagined he would have enjoyed if he had married winteler instead i think of you in heartfelt love every spare minute and am so unhappy as only a man can be.in , einstein entered into a relationship with elsa lwenthal, who was both his first cousin on his mothers side and his second cousin on his fathers. when mari learned of his infidelity soon after moving to berlin with him in april , she returned to zrich, taking hans albert and eduard with her. einstein and mari were granted a divorce on  february  on the grounds of having lived apart for five years. as part of the divorce settlement, einstein agreed that if he were to win a nobel prize, he would give the money that he received to mari; she had to wait only two years before her foresight in extracting this promise from him was rewarded.einstein married lwenthal in . in , he began a relationship with a secretary named betty neumann, the niece of his close friend hans mhsam. lwenthal nevertheless remained loyal to him, accompanying him when he emigrated to the united states in . in , she was diagnosed with heart and kidney problems. she died in december .a volume of einsteins letters released by hebrew university of jerusalem in  added further names to the catalog of women with whom he was romantically involved. they included margarete lebach , estella katzenellenbogen , toni mendel  and ethel michanowski , with whom he spent time and from whom he accepted gifts while married to lwenthal. after being widowed, einstein was briefly in a relationship with margarita konenkova, thought by some to be a russian spy; her husband, the russian sculptor sergei konenkov, created the bronze bust of einstein at the institute for advanced study at princeton.following an episode of acute mental illness at about the age of twenty, einsteins son eduard was diagnosed with schizophrenia. he spent the remainder of his life either in the care of his mother or in temporary confinement in an asylum. after her death, he was committed permanently to burghlzli, the psychiatric university hospital in zrich.

einstein graduated from the federal polytechnic school in , duly certified as competent to teach mathematics and physics. his successful acquisition of swiss citizenship in february  was not followed by the usual sequel of conscription; the swiss authorities deemed him medically unfit for military service. he found that swiss schools too appeared to have no use for him, failing to offer him a teaching position despite the almost two years that he spent applying for one. eventually it was with the help of marcel grossmanns father that he secured a post in bern at the swiss patent office, as an assistant examiner  level iii.patent applications that landed on einsteins desk for his evaluation included ideas for a gravel sorter and an electric typewriter. his employers were pleased enough with his work to make his position permanent in , although they did not think that he should be promoted until he had fully mastered machine technology. it is conceivable that his labors at the patent office had a bearing on his development of his special theory of relativity. he arrived at his revolutionary ideas about space, time and light through thought experiments about the transmission of signals and the synchronization of clocks, matters which also figured in some of the inventions submitted to him for assessment.in , einstein and some friends whom he had met in bern formed a group that held regular meetings to discuss science and philosophy. their choice of a name for their club, the olympia academy, was an ironic comment upon its far from olympian status. sometimes they were joined by mari, who limited her participation in their proceedings to careful listening. the thinkers whose works they reflected upon included henri poincar, ernst mach and david hume, all of whom significantly influenced einsteins own subsequent ideas and beliefs.

einsteins first paper, folgerungen aus den capillarittserscheinungen , in which he proposed a model of intermolecular attraction that he afterwards disavowed as worthless, was published in the journal annalen der physik in . his page doctoral dissertation also addressed a topic in molecular physics. titled eine neue bestimmung der molekldimensionen  and dedicated to his friend marcel grossman, it was completed on  april  and approved by professor alfred kleiner of the university of zurich three months later.  four other pieces of work that einstein completed in his famous papers on the photoelectric effect, brownian motion, his special theory of relativity and the equivalence of mass and energyhave led to the years being celebrated as an annus mirabilis for physics almost as wonderful as  . the publications deeply impressed einsteins contemporaries.

einsteins sabbatical as a civil servant approached its end in , when he secured a junior teaching position at the university of bern. in , a lecture on relativistic electrodynamics that he gave at the university of zurich, much admired by alfred kleiner, led to zrichs luring him away from bern with a newly created associate professorship. promotion to a full professorship followed in april , when he accepted a chair at the german charlesferdinand university in prague, a move which required him to become an austrian citizen of the austrohungarian empire. his time in prague saw him producing eleven research papers.

 in july , he returned to his alma mater, the eth zurich, to take up a chair in theoretical physics. his teaching activities there centred on thermodynamics and analytical mechanics, and his research interests included the molecular theory of heat, continuum mechanics and the development of a relativistic theory of gravitation. in his work on the latter topic, he was assisted by his friend, marcel grossmann, whose knowledge of the kind of mathematics required was greater than his own.in the spring of , two german visitors, max planck and walther nernst, called upon einstein in zrich in the hope of persuading him to relocate to berlin. they offered him membership of the prussian academy of sciences, the directorship of the planned kaiser wilhelm institute for physics and a chair at the humboldt university of berlin that would allow him to pursue his research supported by a professorial salary but with no teaching duties to burden him. their invitation was all the more appealing to him because berlin happened to be the home of his latest girlfriend, elsa lwenthal. he duly joined the academy on 

july , and moved into an apartment in the berlin district of dahlem on  april . he was installed in his humboldt university position shortly thereafter.the outbreak of the first world war in july  marked the beginning of einsteins gradual estrangement from the nation of his birth. when the manifesto of the ninetythree was published in october a document signed by a host of prominent german thinkers that justified germanys belligerenceeinstein was one of the few german intellectuals to distance himself from it and sign the alternative, eirenic manifesto to the europeans instead. but this expression of his doubts about german policy did not prevent him from being elected to a twoyear term as president of the german physical society in . and when the kaiser wilhelm institute for physics opened its doors the following yearits foundation delayed because of the wareinstein was appointed its first director, just as planck and nernst had promised.einstein was elected a foreign member of the royal netherlands academy of arts and sciences in , and a foreign member of the royal society in . in , he was awarded the  nobel prize in physics for his services to theoretical physics, and especially for his discovery of the law of the photoelectric effect. at this point some physicists still regarded the general theory of relativity sceptically, and the nobel citation displayed a degree of doubt even about the work on photoelectricity that it acknowledged it did not assent to einsteins notion of the particulate nature of light, which only won over the entire scientific community when s. n. bose derived the planck spectrum in . that same year, einstein was elected an international honorary member of the american academy of arts and sciences. britains closest equivalent of the nobel award, the royal societys copley medal, was not hung around einsteins neck until . he was elected an international member of the american philosophical society in .einstein resigned from the prussian academy in march . his accomplishments in berlin had included the completion of the general theory of relativity, proving the einsteinde haas effect, contributing to the quantum theory of radiation, and the development of boseeinstein statistics.

in , einstein reached a milestone on his long journey from his special theory of relativity to a new idea of gravitation with the formulation of his equivalence principle, which asserts that an observer in an infinitesimally small box falling freely in a gravitational field would be unable to find any evidence that the field exists. in , he used the principle to estimate the amount by which a ray of light from a distant star would be bent by the gravitational pull of the sun as it passed close to the suns photosphere . he reworked his calculation in , having now found a way to model gravitation with the riemann curvature tensor of a noneuclidean fourdimensional spacetime. by the fall of , his reimagining of the mathematics of gravitation in terms of riemannian geometry was complete, and he applied his new theory not just to the behavior of the sun as a gravitational lens but also to another astronomical phenomenon, the precession of the perihelion of mercury . a total eclipse of the sun that took place on  may  provided an opportunity to put his theory of gravitational lensing to the test, and observations performed by sir arthur eddington yielded results that were consistent with his calculations. eddingtons work was reported at length in newspapers around the world. on  november , for example, the leading british newspaper, the times, printed a banner headline that read revolution in science  new theory of the universe  newtonian ideas overthrown.

with eddingtons eclipse observations widely reported not just in academic journals but by the popular press as well, einstein became perhaps the worlds first celebrity scientist, a genius who had shattered a paradigm that had been basic to physicists understanding of the universe since the seventeenth century.einstein began his new life as an intellectual icon in america, where he arrived on  april . he was welcomed to new york city by mayor john francis hylan, and then spent three weeks giving lectures and attending receptions. he spoke several times at columbia university and princeton, and in washington, he visited the white house with representatives of the national academy of sciences. he returned to europe via london, where he was the guest of the philosopher and statesman viscount haldane. he used his time in the british capital to meet several people prominent in british scientific, political or intellectual life, and to deliver a lecture at kings college. in july , he published an essay, my first impression of the u.s.a., in which he sought to sketch the american character, much as had alexis de tocqueville in democracy in america . he wrote of his transatlantic hosts in highly approving terms what strikes a visitor is the joyous, positive attitude to life ... the american is friendly, selfconfident, optimistic, and without envy.in , einsteins travels were to the old world rather than the new. he devoted six months to a tour of asia that saw him speaking in japan, singapore and sri lanka . after his first public lecture in tokyo, he met emperor yoshihito and his wife at the imperial palace, with thousands of spectators thronging the streets in the hope of catching a glimpse of him.  he was greeted with even greater enthusiasm on the last leg of his tour, in which he spent twelve days in mandatory palestine, newly entrusted to british rule by the league of nations in the aftermath of the first world war. sir herbert samuel, the british high commissioner, welcomed him with a degree of ceremony normally only accorded to a visiting head of state, including a cannon salute. one reception held in his honor was stormed by people determined to hear him speak he told them that he was happy that jews were beginning to be recognized as a force in the world.einsteins decision to tour the eastern hemisphere in  meant that he was unable to go to stockholm in the december of that year to participate in the nobel prize ceremony. his place at the traditional nobel banquet was taken by a german diplomat, who gave a speech praising him not only as a physicist but also as a campaigner for peace. a two week visit to spain that he undertook in  saw him collecting another award, a membership of the spanish academy of sciences signified by a diploma handed to him by king alfonso xiii. 

from  until , with the exception of a few months in  and , einstein was a member of the genevabased international committee on intellectual cooperation of the league of nations, a group set up by the league to encourage scientists, artists, scholars, teachers and other people engaged in the life of the mind to work more closely with their counterparts in other countries. he was appointed as a german delegate rather than as a representative of switzerland because of the machinations of two catholic activists, oskar halecki and giuseppe motta. by persuading secretary general eric drummond to deny einstein the place on the committee reserved for a swiss thinker, they created an opening for gonzague de reynold, who used his league of nations position as a platform from which to promote traditional catholic doctrine. einsteins former physics professor hendrik lorentz and the polish chemist marie curie were also members of the committee.

in march and april , einstein and his wife visited south america, where they spent about a week in brazil, a week in uruguay and a month in argentina. their tour was suggested by jorge duclout  and mauricio nirenstein  with the support of several argentine scholars, including julio rey pastor, jakob laub, and leopoldo lugones. and was financed primarily by the council of the university of buenos aires and the asociacin hebraica argentina  with a smaller contribution from the argentinegermanic cultural institution.

in december , einstein began another significant sojourn in the united states, drawn back to the us by the offer of a two month research fellowship at the california institute of technology. caltech supported him in his wish that he should not be exposed to quite as much attention from the media as he had experienced when visiting the us in , and he therefore declined all the invitations to receive prizes or make speeches that his admirers poured down upon him. but he remained willing to allow his fans at least some of the time with him that they requested.after arriving in new york city, einstein was taken to various places and events, including chinatown, a lunch with the editors of the new york times, and a performance of carmen at the metropolitan opera, where he was cheered by the audience on his arrival. during the days following, he was given the keys to the city by mayor jimmy walker and met the president of columbia university, who described einstein as the ruling monarch of the mind. harry emerson fosdick, pastor at new yorks riverside church, gave einstein a tour of the church and showed him a fullsize statue that the church made of einstein, standing at the entrance. also during his stay in new york, he joined a crowd of , people at madison square garden during a hanukkah celebration.

einstein next traveled to california, where he met caltech president and nobel laureate robert a. millikan. his friendship with millikan was awkward, as millikan had a penchant for patriotic militarism, where einstein was a pronounced pacifist. during an address to caltechs students, einstein noted that science was often inclined to do more harm than good.this aversion to war also led einstein to befriend author upton sinclair and film star charlie chaplin, both noted for their pacifism. carl laemmle, head of universal studios, gave einstein a tour of his studio and introduced him to chaplin. they had an instant rapport, with chaplin inviting einstein and his wife, elsa, to his home for dinner. chaplin said einsteins outward persona, calm and gentle, seemed to conceal a highly emotional temperament, from which came his extraordinary intellectual energy.chaplins film, city lights, was to premiere a few days later in hollywood, and chaplin invited einstein and elsa to join him as his special guests. walter isaacson, einsteins biographer, described this as one of the most memorable scenes in the new era of celebrity. chaplin visited einstein at his home on a later trip to berlin and recalled his modest little flat and the piano at which he had begun writing his theory. chaplin speculated that it was possibly used as kindling wood by the nazis.

in february , while on a visit to the united states, einstein knew he could not return to germany with the rise to power of the nazis under germanys new chancellor, adolf hitler.while at american universities in early , he undertook his third twomonth visiting professorship at the california institute of technology in pasadena. in february and march , the gestapo repeatedly raided his familys apartment in berlin. he and his wife elsa returned to europe in march, and during the trip, they learned that the german reichstag had passed the enabling act on  march, transforming hitlers government into a de facto legal dictatorship, and that they would not be able to proceed to berlin. later on, they heard that their cottage had been raided by the nazis and einsteins personal sailboat confiscated. upon landing in antwerp, belgium on  march, einstein immediately went to the german consulate and surrendered his passport, formally renouncing his german citizenship. the nazis later sold his boat and converted his cottage into a hitler youth camp.

in april , einstein discovered that the new german government had passed laws barring jews from holding any official positions, including teaching at universities. historian gerald holton describes how, with virtually no audible protest being raised by their colleagues, thousands of jewish scientists were suddenly forced to give up their university positions and their names were removed from the rolls of institutions where they were employed.a month later, einsteins works were among those targeted by the german student union in the nazi book burnings, with nazi propaganda minister joseph goebbels proclaiming, jewish intellectualism is dead. one german magazine included him in a list of enemies of the german regime with the phrase, not yet hanged, offering a , bounty on his head. in a subsequent letter to physicist and friend max born, who had already emigrated from germany to england, einstein wrote, ... i must confess that the degree of their brutality and cowardice came as something of a surprise. after moving to the us, he described the book burnings as a spontaneous emotional outburst by those who shun popular enlightenment, and more than anything else in the world, fear the influence of men of intellectual independence.einstein was now without a permanent home, unsure where he would live and work, and equally worried about the fate of countless other scientists still in germany. aided by the academic assistance council, founded in april  by british liberal politician william beveridge to help academics escape nazi persecution, einstein was able to leave germany. he rented a house in de haan, belgium, where he lived for a few months. in late july , he visited england for about six weeks at the invitation of the british member of parliament commander oliver lockerlampson, who had become friends with him in the preceding years. lockerlampson invited him to stay near his cromer home in a secluded wooden cabin on roughton heath in the parish of roughton, norfolk. to protect einstein, lockerlampson had two bodyguards watch over him; a photo of them carrying shotguns and guarding einstein was published in the daily herald on  july .lockerlampson took einstein to meet winston churchill at his home, and later, austen chamberlain and former prime minister lloyd george. einstein asked them to help bring jewish scientists out of germany. british historian martin gilbert notes that churchill responded immediately, and sent his friend, physicist frederick lindemann, to germany to seek out jewish scientists and place them in british universities. churchill later observed that as a result of germany having driven the jews out, they had lowered their technical standards and put the allies technology ahead of theirs.einstein later contacted leaders of other nations, including turkeys prime minister, ismet inn, to whom he wrote in september  requesting placement of unemployed germanjewish scientists. as a result of einsteins letter, jewish invitees to turkey eventually totaled over , saved individuals.lockerlampson also submitted a bill to parliament to extend british citizenship to einstein, during which period einstein made a number of public appearances describing the crisis brewing in europe. in one of his speeches he denounced germanys treatment of jews, while at the same time he introduced a bill promoting jewish citizenship in palestine, as they were being denied citizenship elsewhere. in his speech he described einstein as a citizen of the world who should be offered a temporary shelter in the uk. both bills failed, however, and einstein then accepted an earlier offer from the institute for advanced study, in princeton, new jersey, us, to become a resident scholar.

on  october , einstein delivered a speech on the importance of academic freedom before a packed audience at the royal albert hall in london, with the times reporting he was wildly cheered throughout. four days later he returned to the us and took up a position at the institute for advanced study, noted for having become a refuge for scientists fleeing nazi germany. at the time, most american universities, including harvard, princeton and yale, had minimal or no jewish faculty or students, as a result of their jewish quotas, which lasted until the late s.einstein was still undecided on his future. he had offers from several european universities, including christ church, oxford, where he stayed for three short periods between may  and june  and was offered a fiveyear research fellowship , but in , he arrived at the decision to remain permanently in the united states and apply for citizenship.einsteins affiliation with the institute for advanced study would last until his death in . he was one of the four first selected  at the new institute. he soon developed a close friendship with gdel; the two would take long walks together discussing their work. bruria kaufman, his assistant, later became a physicist. during this period, einstein tried to develop a unified field theory and to refute the accepted interpretation of quantum physics, both unsuccessfully. he lived in princeton at his home from  onwards. the albert einstein house was made a national historic landmark in .

in , a group of hungarian scientists that included migr physicist le szilrd attempted to alert washington to ongoing nazi atomic bomb research. the groups warnings were discounted. einstein and szilrd, along with other refugees such as edward teller and eugene wigner, regarded it as their responsibility to alert americans to the possibility that german scientists might win the race to build an atomic bomb, and to warn that hitler would be more than willing to resort to such a weapon. to make certain the us was aware of the danger, in july , a few months before the beginning of world war ii in europe, szilrd and wigner visited einstein to explain the possibility of atomic bombs, which einstein, a pacifist, said he had never considered. he was asked to lend his support by writing a letter, with szilrd, to president roosevelt, recommending the us pay attention and engage in its own nuclear weapons research.

the letter is believed to be arguably the key stimulus for the u.s. adoption of serious investigations into nuclear weapons on the eve of the u.s. entry into world war ii. in addition to the letter, einstein used his connections with the belgian royal family and the belgian queen mother to get access with a personal envoy to the white houses oval office. some say that as a result of einsteins letter and his meetings with roosevelt, the us entered the race to develop the bomb, drawing on its immense material, financial, and scientific resources to initiate the manhattan project.

for einstein, war was a disease ... and he called for resistance to war. by signing the letter to roosevelt, some argue he went against his pacifist principles. in , a year before his death, einstein said to his old friend, linus pauling, i made one great mistake in my lifewhen i signed the letter to president roosevelt recommending that atom bombs be made; but there was some justificationthe danger that the germans would make them ... in , einstein and ten other intellectuals and scientists, including british philosopher bertrand russell, signed a manifesto highlighting the danger of nuclear weapons. in  einstein was included posthumously as a charter member of the world academy of art and science , an organization founded by distinguished scientists and intellectuals who committed themselves to the responsible and ethical advances of science, particularly in light of the development of nuclear weapons.

einstein became an american citizen in . not long after settling into his career at the institute for advanced study in princeton, new jersey, he expressed his appreciation of the meritocracy in american culture compared to europe. he recognized the right of individuals to say and think what they pleased without social barriers. as a result, individuals were encouraged, he said, to be more creative, a trait he valued from his early education.einstein joined the national association for the advancement of colored people  in princeton, where he campaigned for the civil rights of african americans. he considered racism americas worst disease, seeing it as handed down from one generation to the next. as part of his involvement, he corresponded with civil rights activist w. e. b. du bois and was prepared to testify on his behalf during his trial in . when einstein offered to be a character witness for du bois, the judge decided to drop the case.in , einstein visited lincoln university in pennsylvania, a historically black college, where he was awarded an honorary degree. lincoln was the first university in the united states to grant college degrees to african americans; alumni include langston hughes and thurgood marshall. einstein gave a speech about racism in america, adding, i do not intend to be quiet about it. a resident of princeton recalls that einstein had once paid the college tuition for a black student. einstein has said, being a jew myself, perhaps i can understand and empathize with how black people feel as victims of discrimination.

in , einstein was one of the founding members of the german democratic party, a liberal party. later in his life, einsteins political view was in favor of socialism and critical of capitalism, which he detailed in his essays such as why socialism. his opinions on the bolsheviks also changed with time. in , he criticized them for not having a wellregulated system of government and called their rule a regime of terror and a tragedy in human history. he later adopted a more moderated view, criticizing their methods but praising them, which is shown by his  remark on vladimir lenin

in lenin i honor a man, who in total sacrifice of his own person has committed his entire energy to realizing social justice. i do not find his methods advisable. one thing is certain, however men like him are the guardians and renewers of mankinds conscience.

einstein offered and was called on to give judgments and opinions on matters often unrelated to theoretical physics or mathematics. he strongly advocated the idea of a democratic global government that would check the power of nationstates in the framework of a world federation. he wrote i advocate world government because i am convinced that there is no other possible way of eliminating the most terrible danger in which man has ever found himself. the fbi created a secret dossier on einstein in ; by the time of his death, it was , pages long.einstein was deeply impressed by mahatma gandhi, with whom he corresponded. he described gandhi as a role model for the generations to come. the initial connection was established on  september , when wilfrid israel took his indian guest v. a. sundaram to meet his friend einstein at his summer home in the town of caputh. sundaram was gandhis disciple and special envoy, whom wilfrid israel met while visiting india and visiting the indian leaders home in . during the visit, einstein wrote a short letter to gandhi that was delivered to him through his envoy, and gandhi responded quickly with his own letter. although in the end einstein and gandhi were unable to meet as they had hoped, the direct connection between them was established through wilfrid israel.

einstein was a figurehead leader in the establishment of the hebrew university of jerusalem, which opened in . earlier, in , he was asked by the biochemist and president of the world zionist organization, chaim weizmann, to help raise funds for the planned university. he made suggestions for the creation of an institute of agriculture, a chemical institute and an institute of microbiology in order to fight the various ongoing epidemics such as malaria, which he called an evil that was undermining a third of the countrys development. he also promoted the establishment of an oriental studies institute, to include language courses given in both hebrew and arabic.einstein was not a nationalist and opposed the creation of an independent jewish state. he felt that the waves of arriving jews of the aliyah could live alongside existing arabs in palestine. the state of israel was established without his help in ; einstein was limited to a marginal role in the zionist movement. upon the death of israeli president weizmann in november , prime minister david bengurion offered einstein the largely ceremonial position of president of israel at the urging of ezriel carlebach. the offer was presented by israels ambassador in washington, abba eban, who explained that the offer embodies the deepest respect which the jewish people can repose in any of its sons. einstein wrote that he was deeply moved, but at once saddened and ashamed that he could not accept it.

einstein expounded his spiritual outlook in a wide array of writings and interviews. he said he had sympathy for the impersonal pantheistic god of baruch spinozas philosophy. he did not believe in a personal god who concerns himself with fates and actions of human beings, a view which he described as nave. he clarified, however, that i am not an atheist, preferring to call himself an agnostic, or a deeply religious nonbeliever. when asked if he believed in an afterlife, einstein replied, no. and one life is enough for me.einstein was primarily affiliated with nonreligious humanist and ethical culture groups in both the uk and us. he served on the advisory board of the first humanist society of new york, and was an honorary associate of the rationalist association, which publishes new humanist in britain. for the th anniversary of the new york society for ethical culture, he stated that the idea of ethical culture embodied his personal conception of what is most valuable and enduring in religious idealism. he observed, without ethical culture there is no salvation for humanity.

in a germanlanguage letter to philosopher eric gutkind, dated  january , einstein wrotethe word god is for me nothing more than the expression and product of human weaknesses, the bible a collection of honorable, but still primitive legends which are nevertheless pretty childish. no interpretation no matter how subtle can  change this. ... for me the jewish religion like all other religions is an incarnation of the most childish superstitions. and the jewish people to whom i gladly belong and with whose mentality i have a deep affinity have no different quality for me than all other people. ... i cannot see anything chosen about them.

einstein had been sympathetic toward vegetarianism for a long time. in a letter in  to hermann huth, vicepresident of the german vegetarian federation , he wrotealthough i have been prevented by outward circumstances from observing a strictly vegetarian diet, i have long been an adherent to the cause in principle. besides agreeing with the aims of vegetarianism for aesthetic and moral reasons, it is my view that a vegetarian manner of living by its purely physical effect on the human temperament would most beneficially influence the lot of mankind.

he became a vegetarian himself only during the last part of his life. in march  he wrote in a letter so i am living without fats, without meat, without fish, but am feeling quite well this way. it almost seems to me that man was not born to be a carnivore.

einstein developed an appreciation for music at an early age. in his late journals he wrote

if i were not a physicist, i would probably be a musician. i often think in music. i live my daydreams in music. i see my life in terms of music ... i get most joy in life out of music.

his mother played the piano reasonably well and wanted her son to learn the violin, not only to instill in him a love of music but also to help him assimilate into german culture. according to conductor leon botstein, einstein began playing when he was . however, he did not enjoy it at that age.when he turned , he discovered the violin sonatas of mozart, whereupon he became enamored of mozarts compositions and studied music more willingly. einstein taught himself to play without ever practicing systematically. he said that love is a better teacher than a sense of duty. at the age of , he was heard by a school examiner in aarau while playing beethovens violin sonatas. the examiner stated afterward that his playing was remarkable and revealing of great insight. what struck the examiner, writes botstein, was that einstein displayed a deep love of the music, a quality that was and remains in short supply. music possessed an unusual meaning for this student.music took on a pivotal and permanent role in einsteins life from that period on. although the idea of becoming a professional musician himself was not on his mind at any time, among those with whom einstein played chamber music were a few professionals, including kurt appelbaum, and he performed for private audiences and friends. chamber music had also become a regular part of his social life while living in bern, zrich, and berlin, where he played with max planck and his son, among others. he is sometimes erroneously credited as the editor of the  edition of the kchel catalog of mozarts work; that edition was prepared by alfred einstein, who may have been a distant relation.in , while engaged in research at the california institute of technology, he visited the zoellner family conservatory in los angeles, where he played some of beethoven and mozarts works with members of the zoellner quartet. near the end of his life, when the young juilliard quartet visited him in princeton, he played his violin with them, and the quartet was impressed by einsteins level of coordination and intonation.

on  april , einstein experienced internal bleeding caused by the rupture of an abdominal aortic aneurysm, which had previously been reinforced surgically by rudolph nissen in . he took the draft of a speech he was preparing for a television appearance commemorating the state of israels seventh anniversary with him to the hospital, but he did not live to complete it.einstein refused surgery, saying, i want to go when i want. it is tasteless to prolong life artificially. i have done my share; it is time to go. i will do it elegantly. he died in the university medical center of princeton at plainsboro early the next morning at the age of , having continued to work until near the end.during the autopsy, the pathologist thomas stoltz harvey removed einsteins brain for preservation without the permission of his family, in the hope that the neuroscience of the future would be able to discover what made einstein so intelligent. einsteins remains were cremated in trenton, new jersey, and his ashes were scattered at an undisclosed location.in a memorial lecture delivered on  december  at unesco headquarters, nuclear physicist j. robert oppenheimer summarized his impression of einstein as a person he was almost wholly without sophistication and wholly without worldliness ... there was always with him a wonderful purity at once childlike and profoundly stubborn.einstein bequeathed his personal archives, library, and intellectual assets to the hebrew university of jerusalem in israel.

throughout his life, einstein published hundreds of books and articles. he published more than  scientific papers and  nonscientific ones. on  december , universities and archives announced the release of einsteins papers, comprising more than , unique documents. einsteins intellectual achievements and originality have made the word einstein synonymous with genius. in addition to the work he did by himself he also collaborated with other scientists on additional projects including the boseeinstein statistics, the einstein refrigerator and others.there is some evidence from einsteins writings that he collaborated with his first wife, mileva mari. in  december , a first article on capillarity signed only under his name was submitted. the decision to publish only under his name seems to have been mutual, but the exact reason is unknown.

the annus mirabilis papers are four articles pertaining to the photoelectric effect , brownian motion, the special theory of relativity, and e  mc that einstein published in the annalen der physik scientific journal in . these four works contributed substantially to the foundation of modern physics and changed views on space, time, and matter. the four papers are

einsteins first paper submitted in  to annalen der physik was on capillary attraction. it was published in  with the title folgerungen aus den capillarittserscheinungen, which translates as conclusions from the capillarity phenomena. two papers he published in   attempted to interpret atomic phenomena from a statistical point of view. these papers were the foundation for the  paper on brownian motion, which showed that brownian movement can be construed as firm evidence that molecules exist. his research in  and  was mainly concerned with the effect of finite atomic size on diffusion phenomena.

einstein returned to the problem of thermodynamic fluctuations, giving a treatment of the density variations in a fluid at its critical point. ordinarily the density fluctuations are controlled by the second derivative of the free energy with respect to the density. at the critical point, this derivative is zero, leading to large fluctuations. the effect of density fluctuations is that light of all wavelengths is scattered, making the fluid look milky white. einstein relates this to rayleigh scattering, which is what happens when the fluctuation size is much smaller than the wavelength, and which explains why the sky is blue. einstein quantitatively derived critical opalescence from a treatment of density fluctuations, and demonstrated how both the effect and rayleigh scattering originate from the atomistic constitution of matter.

einsteins zur elektrodynamik bewegter krper  was received on  june  and published  september of that same year. it reconciled conflicts between maxwells equations  and the laws of newtonian mechanics by introducing changes to the laws of mechanics. observationally, the effects of these changes are most apparent at high speeds . the theory developed in this paper later became known as einsteins special theory of relativity.

this paper predicted that, when measured in the frame of a relatively moving observer, a clock carried by a moving body would appear to slow down, and the body itself would contract in its direction of motion. this paper also argued that the idea of a luminiferous aetherone of the leading theoretical entities in physics at the timewas superfluous.in his paper on massenergy equivalence, einstein produced e  mc as a consequence of his special relativity equations. einsteins  work on relativity remained controversial for many years, but was accepted by leading physicists, starting with max planck.einstein originally framed special relativity in terms of kinematics . in , hermann minkowski reinterpreted special relativity in geometric terms as a theory of spacetime. einstein adopted minkowskis formalism in his  general theory of relativity.

general relativity  is a theory of gravitation that was developed by einstein between  and . according to it, the observed gravitational attraction between masses results from the warping of spacetime by those masses. general relativity has developed into an essential tool in modern astrophysics; it provides the foundation for the current understanding of black holes, regions of space where gravitational attraction is so strong that not even light can escape.as einstein later said, the reason for the development of general relativity was that the preference of inertial motions within special relativity was unsatisfactory, while a theory which from the outset prefers no state of motion  should appear more satisfactory. consequently, in  he published an article on acceleration under special relativity. in that article titled on the relativity principle and the conclusions drawn from it, he argued that free fall is really inertial motion, and that for a freefalling observer the rules of special relativity must apply. this argument is called the equivalence principle. in the same article, einstein also predicted the phenomena of gravitational time dilation, gravitational redshift and gravitational lensing.in , einstein published another article on the influence of gravitation on the propagation of light expanding on the  article, in which he estimated the amount of deflection of light by massive bodies. thus, the theoretical prediction of general relativity could for the first time be tested experimentally.

in , einstein predicted gravitational waves, ripples in the curvature of spacetime which propagate as waves, traveling outward from the source, transporting energy as gravitational radiation. the existence of gravitational waves is possible under general relativity due to its lorentz invariance which brings the concept of a finite speed of propagation of the physical interactions of gravity with it. by contrast, gravitational waves cannot exist in the newtonian theory of gravitation, which postulates that the physical interactions of gravity propagate at infinite speed.

the first, indirect, detection of gravitational waves came in the s through observation of a pair of closely orbiting neutron stars, psr b. the explanation for the decay in their orbital period was that they were emitting gravitational waves. einsteins prediction was confirmed on  february , when researchers at ligo published the first observation of gravitational waves, detected on earth on  september , nearly one hundred years after the prediction.

while developing general relativity, einstein became confused about the gauge invariance in the theory. he formulated an argument that led him to conclude that a general relativistic field theory is impossible. he gave up looking for fully generally covariant tensor equations and searched for equations that would be invariant under general linear transformations only.in june , the entwurf  theory was the result of these investigations. as its name suggests, it was a sketch of a theory, less elegant and more difficult than general relativity, with the equations of motion supplemented by additional gauge fixing conditions. after more than two years of intensive work, einstein realized that the hole argument was mistaken and abandoned the theory in november .

in , einstein applied the general theory of relativity to the structure of the universe as a whole. he discovered that the general field equations predicted a universe that was dynamic, either contracting or expanding. as observational evidence for a dynamic universe was lacking at the time, einstein introduced a new term, the cosmological constant, into the field equations, in order to allow the theory to predict a static universe. the modified field equations predicted a static universe of closed curvature, in accordance with einsteins understanding of machs principle in these years. this model became known as the einstein world or einsteins static universe.following the discovery of the recession of the galaxies by edwin hubble in , einstein abandoned his static model of the universe, and proposed two dynamic models of the cosmos, the friedmanneinstein universe of  and the einsteinde sitter universe of . in each of these models, einstein discarded the cosmological constant, claiming that it was in any case theoretically unsatisfactory.in many einstein biographies, it is claimed that einstein referred to the cosmological constant in later years as his biggest blunder, based on a letter george gamow claimed to have received from him. the astrophysicist mario livio has recently cast doubt on this claim.in late , a team led by the irish physicist cormac oraifeartaigh discovered evidence that, shortly after learning of hubbles observations of the recession of the galaxies, einstein considered a steadystate model of the universe. in a hitherto overlooked manuscript, apparently written in early , einstein explored a model of the expanding universe in which the density of matter remains constant due to a continuous creation of matter, a process that he associated with the cosmological constant. as he stated in the paper, in what follows, i would like to draw attention to a solution to equation  that can account for hubbels sic facts, and in which the density is constant over time ... if one considers a physically bounded volume, particles of matter will be continually leaving it. for the density to remain constant, new particles of matter must be continually formed in the volume from space.

it thus appears that einstein considered a steadystate model of the expanding universe many years before hoyle, bondi and gold. however, einsteins steadystate model contained a fundamental flaw and he quickly abandoned the idea.

general relativity includes a dynamical spacetime, so it is difficult to see how to identify the conserved energy and momentum. noethers theorem allows these quantities to be determined from a lagrangian with translation invariance, but general covariance makes translation invariance into something of a gauge symmetry. the energy and momentum derived within general relativity by noethers prescriptions do not make a real tensor for this reason.einstein argued that this is true for a fundamental reason the gravitational field could be made to vanish by a choice of coordinates. he maintained that the noncovariant energy momentum pseudotensor was, in fact, the best description of the energy momentum distribution in a gravitational field. while the use of noncovariant objects like pseudotensors was criticized by erwin schrdinger and others, einsteins approach has been echoed by physicists including lev landau and evgeny lifshitz.

in , einstein collaborated with nathan rosen to produce a model of a wormhole, often called einsteinrosen bridges. his motivation was to model elementary particles with charge as a solution of gravitational field equations, in line with the program outlined in the paper do gravitational fields play an important role in the constitution of the elementary particles. these solutions cut and pasted schwarzschild black holes to make a bridge between two patches. because these solutions included spacetime curvature without the presence of a physical body, einstein and rosen suggested that they could provide the beginnings of a theory that avoided the notion of point particles. however, it was later found that einsteinrosen bridges are not stable.

in order to incorporate spinning point particles into general relativity, the affine connection needed to be generalized to include an antisymmetric part, called the torsion. this modification was made by einstein and cartan in the s.

in general relativity, gravitational force is reimagined as curvature of spacetime. a curved path like an orbit is not the result of a force deflecting a body from an ideal straightline path, but rather the bodys attempt to fall freely through a background that is itself curved by the presence of other masses. a remark by john archibald wheeler that has become proverbial among physicists summarizes the theory spacetime tells matter how to move; matter tells spacetime how to curve. the einstein field equations cover the latter aspect of the theory, relating the curvature of spacetime to the distribution of matter and energy. the geodesic equation covers the former aspect, stating that freely falling bodies follow lines that are as straight as possible in a curved spacetime. einstein regarded this as an independent fundamental assumption that had to be postulated in addition to the field equations in order to complete the theory. believing this to be a shortcoming in how general relativity was originally presented, he wished to derive it from the field equations themselves. since the equations of general relativity are nonlinear, a lump of energy made out of pure gravitational fields, like a black hole, would move on a trajectory which is determined by the einstein field equations themselves, not by a new law. accordingly, einstein proposed that the field equations would determine the path of a singular solution, like a black hole, to be a geodesic. both physicists and philosophers have often repeated the assertion that the geodesic equation can be obtained from applying the field equations to the motion of a gravitational singularity, but this claim remains disputed.

in a  paper, einstein postulated that light itself consists of localized particles . einsteins light quanta were nearly universally rejected by all physicists, including max planck and niels bohr. this idea only became universally accepted in , with robert millikans detailed experiments on the photoelectric effect, and with the measurement of compton scattering.

einstein concluded that each wave of frequency f is associated with a collection of photons with energy hf each, where h is plancks constant. he did not say much more, because he was not sure how the particles were related to the wave. but he did suggest that this idea would explain certain experimental results, notably the photoelectric effect.

in , einstein proposed a model of matter where each atom in a lattice structure is an independent harmonic oscillator. in the einstein model, each atom oscillates independentlya series of equally spaced quantized states for each oscillator. einstein was aware that getting the frequency of the actual oscillations would be difficult, but he nevertheless proposed this theory because it was a particularly clear demonstration that quantum mechanics could solve the specific heat problem in classical mechanics. peter debye refined this model.

in , einstein received a description of a statistical model from indian physicist satyendra nath bose, based on a counting method that assumed that light could be understood as a gas of indistinguishable particles. einstein noted that boses statistics applied to some atoms as well as to the proposed light particles, and submitted his translation of boses paper to the zeitschrift fr physik. einstein also published his own articles describing the model and its implications, among them the boseeinstein condensate phenomenon that some particulates should appear at very low temperatures. it was not until  that the first such condensate was produced experimentally by eric allin cornell and carl wieman using ultracooling equipment built at the nistjila laboratory at the university of colorado at boulder. boseeinstein statistics are now used to describe the behaviors of any assembly of bosons. einsteins sketches for this project may be seen in the einstein archive in the library of the leiden university.

although the patent office promoted einstein to technical examiner second class in , he had not given up on academia. in , he became a privatdozent at the university of bern. in ber die entwicklung unserer anschauungen ber das wesen und die konstitution der strahlung , on the quantization of light, and in an earlier  paper, einstein showed that max plancks energy quanta must have welldefined momenta and act in some respects as independent, pointlike particles. this paper introduced the photon concept  and inspired the notion of waveparticle duality in quantum mechanics. einstein saw this waveparticle duality in radiation as concrete evidence for his conviction that physics needed a new, unified foundation.

in a series of works completed from  to , planck reformulated his  quantum theory and introduced the idea of zeropoint energy in his second quantum theory. soon, this idea attracted the attention of einstein and his assistant otto stern. assuming the energy of rotating diatomic molecules contains zeropoint energy, they then compared the theoretical specific heat of hydrogen gas with the experimental data. the numbers matched nicely. however, after publishing the findings, they promptly withdrew their support, because they no longer had confidence in the correctness of the idea of zeropoint energy.

in , at the height of his work on relativity, einstein published an article in physikalische zeitschrift that proposed the possibility of stimulated emission, the physical process that makes possible the maser and the laser.

this article showed that the statistics of absorption and emission of light would only be consistent with plancks distribution law if the emission of light into a mode with n photons would be enhanced statistically compared to the emission of light into an empty mode. this paper was enormously influential in the later development of quantum mechanics, because it was the first paper to show that the statistics of atomic transitions had simple laws.

einstein discovered louis de broglies work and supported his ideas, which were received skeptically at first. in another major paper from this era, einstein observed that de broglie waves could explain the quantization rules of bohr and sommerfeld. this paper would inspire schrdingers work of .

einstein played a major role in developing quantum theory, beginning with his  paper on the photoelectric effect. however, he became displeased with modern quantum mechanics as it had evolved after , despite its acceptance by other physicists. he was skeptical that the randomness of quantum mechanics was fundamental rather than the result of determinism, stating that god is not playing at dice. until the end of his life, he continued to maintain that quantum mechanics was incomplete.

 the bohreinstein debates were a series of public disputes about quantum mechanics between einstein and niels bohr, who were two of its founders. their debates are remembered because of their importance to the philosophy of science. their debates would influence later interpretations of quantum mechanics.

einstein never fully accepted quantum mechanics. while he recognized that it made correct predictions, he believed a more fundamental description of nature must be possible. over the years he presented multiple arguments to this effect, but the one he preferred most dated to a debate with bohr in . einstein suggested a thought experiment in which two objects are allowed to interact and then moved apart a great distance from each other. the quantummechanical description of the two objects is a mathematical entity known as a wavefunction. if the wavefunction that describes the two objects before their interaction is given, then the schrdinger equation provides the wavefunction that describes them after their interaction. but because of what would later be called quantum entanglement, measuring one object would lead to an instantaneous change of the wavefunction describing the other object, no matter how far away it is. moreover, the choice of which measurement to perform upon the first object would affect what wavefunction could result for the second object. einstein reasoned that no influence could propagate from the first object to the second instantaneously fast. indeed, he argued, physics depends on being able to tell one thing apart from another, and such instantaneous influences would call that into question. because the true physical condition of the second object could not be immediately altered by an action done to the first, einstein concluded, the wavefunction could not be that true physical condition, only an incomplete description of it.a more famous version of this argument came in , when einstein published a paper with boris podolsky and nathan rosen that laid out what would become known as the epr paradox. in this thought experiment, two particles interact in such a way that the wavefunction describing them is entangled. then, no matter how far the two particles were separated, a precise position measurement on one particle would imply the ability to predict, perfectly, the result of measuring the position of the other particle. likewise, a precise momentum measurement of one particle would result in an equally precise prediction for of the momentum of the other particle, without needing to disturb the other particle in any way. they argued that no action taken on the first particle could instantaneously affect the other, since this would involve information being transmitted faster than light, which is forbidden by the theory of relativity. they invoked a principle, later known as the epr criterion of reality, positing that if, without in any way disturbing a system, we can predict with certainty  the value of a physical quantity, then there exists an element of reality corresponding to that quantity. from this, they inferred that the second particle must have a definite value of both position and of momentum prior to either quantity being measured. but quantum mechanics considers these two observables incompatible and thus does not associate simultaneous values for both to any system. einstein, podolsky, and rosen therefore concluded that quantum theory does not provide a complete description of reality.in , john stewart bell carried the analysis of quantum entanglement much further. he deduced that if measurements are performed independently on the two separated particles of an entangled pair, then the assumption that the outcomes depend upon hidden variables within each half implies a mathematical constraint on how the outcomes on the two measurements are correlated. this constraint would later be called a bell inequality. bell then showed that quantum physics predicts correlations that violate this inequality. consequently, the only way that hidden variables could explain the predictions of quantum physics is if they are nonlocal, which is to say that somehow the two particles are able to interact instantaneously no matter how widely they ever become separated. bell argued that because an explanation of quantum phenomena in terms of hidden variables would require nonlocality, the epr paradox is resolved in the way which einstein would have liked least.despite this, and although einstein personally found the argument in the epr paper overly complicated, that paper became among the most influential papers published in physical review. it is considered a centerpiece of the development of quantum information theory.

encouraged by his success with general relativity, einstein sought an even more ambitious geometrical theory that would treat gravitation and electromagnetism as aspects of a single entity. in , he described his unified field theory in a scientific american article titled on the generalized theory of gravitation. his attempt to find the most fundamental laws of nature won him praise but not success a particularly conspicuous blemish of his model was that it did not accommodate the strong and weak nuclear forces, neither of which was well understood until many years after his death. although most researchers now believe that einsteins approach to unifying physics was mistaken, his goal of a theory of everything is one to which his successors still aspire.

einstein conducted other investigations that were unsuccessful and abandoned. these pertain to force, superconductivity, and other research.

in addition to longtime collaborators leopold infeld, nathan rosen, peter bergmann and others, einstein also had some oneshot collaborations with various scientists.

in , owen willans richardson predicted that a change in the magnetic moment of a free body will cause this body to rotate. this effect is a consequence of the conservation of angular momentum and is strong enough to be observable in ferromagnetic materials. einstein and wander johannes de haas published two papers in  claiming the first experimental observation of the effect. measurements of this kind demonstrate that the phenomenon of magnetization is caused by the alignment  of the angular momenta of the electrons in the material along the axis of magnetization. these measurements also allow the separation of the two contributions to the magnetization that which is associated with the spin and with the orbital motion of the electrons.

in , einstein and his former student le szilrd coinvented  the einstein refrigerator. this absorption refrigerator was then revolutionary for having no moving parts and using only heat as an input. on  november , u.s. patent ,, was awarded to einstein and le szilrd for the refrigerator. their invention was not immediately put into commercial production, but the most promising of their patents were acquired by the swedish company electrolux.einstein also invented an electromagnetic pump, sound reproduction device, and several other household devices.

while traveling, einstein wrote daily to his wife elsa and adopted stepdaughters margot and ilse. the letters were included in the papers bequeathed to the hebrew university of jerusalem. margot einstein permitted the personal letters to be made available to the public, but requested that it not be done until twenty years after her death . barbara wolff, of the hebrew universitys albert einstein archives, told the bbc that there are about , pages of private correspondence written between  and .einsteins right of publicity was litigated in  in a federal district court in california. although the court initially held that the right had expired, that ruling was immediately appealed, and the decision was later vacated in its entirety. the underlying claims between the parties in that lawsuit were ultimately settled. the right is enforceable, and the hebrew university of jerusalem is the exclusive representative of that right. corbis, successor to the roger richman agency, licenses the use of his name and associated imagery, as agent for the university.mount einstein in the chugach mountains of alaska was named in .

mount einstein in new zealands paparoa range was named after him in  by the department of scientific and industrial research.

einstein became one of the most famous scientific celebrities after the confirmation of his general theory of relativity in . although most of the public had little understanding of his work, he was widely recognized and admired. in the period before world war ii, the new yorker published a vignette in their the talk of the town feature saying that einstein was so well known in america that he would be stopped on the street by people wanting him to explain that theory. eventually he came to cope with unwanted enquirers by pretending to be someone else pardon me, sorry always i am mistaken for professor einstein.einstein has been the subject of or inspiration for many novels, films, plays, and works of music. he is a favorite model for depictions of absentminded professors; his expressive face and distinctive hairstyle have been widely copied and exaggerated. time magazines frederic golden wrote that einstein was a cartoonists dream come true.many popular quotations are often misattributed to him. for example, it is often claimed, erroneously, that he said, the definition of insanity is doing the same thing over and over and expecting different results.

einstein received numerous awards and honors, and in , he was awarded the  nobel prize in physics for his services to theoretical physics, and especially for his discovery of the law of the photoelectric effect. none of the nominations in  met the criteria set by alfred nobel, so the  prize was carried forward and awarded to einstein in .einsteinium, one of the synthetic elements in the periodic table, was named in his honor.

arnold alois schwarzenegger  is an austrian and american actor, businessman, filmmaker, former politician, and former professional bodybuilder best known for his roles in highprofile action movies. he served as the th governor of california from  to  and was among time magazines  most influential people in the world in  and .schwarzenegger began lifting weights at age  and won the mr. universe title aged , and subsequently the mr. olympia title seven times. he is widely regarded as one of the greatest bodybuilders of all time, and has written many books and articles about it. the arnold sports festival, considered the secondmost important bodybuilding event after mr. olympia, is named after him. he appeared in the bodybuilding documentary pumping iron . he retired from bodybuilding and gained worldwide fame as a hollywood action star, with his breakthrough in the sword and sorcery epic conan the barbarian , a boxoffice hit with a sequel in . after playing the title character in the science fiction film the terminator , he starred in terminator  judgment day  and three other sequels. his other successful action films included commando , the running man , predator , total recall , and true lies , in addition to comedy films such as twins , kindergarten cop  and jingle all the way . he is the founder of the film production company oak productions.as a registered republican, schwarzenegger chaired the presidents council on physical fitness and sports during most of the george h. w. bush administration. on october , , he was elected governor of california in a special recall election to replace thengovernor gray davis. he received . of the vote,  points ahead of democrat runnerup cruz bustamante. he was sworn in on november  to serve the remainder of davis term, and was reelected in the  california gubernatorial election with an increased vote share of . to serve a full term. in  he reached his term limit as governor and returned to acting.

schwarzenegger was nicknamed the austrian oak in his bodybuilding days, arnie or schwarzy during his acting career, and the governator  during his political career. he married maria shriver, a niece of president john f. kennedy, in . they separated in  after he admitted to having fathered a child with their housemaid in ; their divorce was finalized in .

arnold alois schwarzenegger was born in thal on july , , the second son of gustav schwarzenegger and his wife aurelia . gustav was the local chief of police, and after the anschluss in , joined the nazi party and, in  the sturmabteilung . in world war ii, gustav served as a military policeman in the invasions of poland, france and the soviet union, including the siege of leningrad, rising to the title of hauptfeldwebel. he was wounded in the battle of stalingrad, and was discharged in  following a bout of malaria. according to holocaust scholar michael berenbaum, gustav schwarzenegger served in theaters of the war where atrocities were committed. but there is no way to know from the documents whether he played a role. gustavs background received wide press attention during the  california gubernatorial recall election in which schwarzenegger was elected.gustav married aurelia on october , ; he was  and she was . according to schwarzenegger, his parents were very strict back then in austria it was a very different world ... if we did something bad or we disobeyed our parents, the rod was not spared. he grew up in a catholic family. gustav preferred his elder son, meinhard, over arnold. his favoritism was strong and blatant, which stemmed from unfounded suspicion that arnold was not his biological child. schwarzenegger has said that his father had no patience for listening or understanding your problems. he had a good relationship with his mother, with whom he kept in touch until her death.at school, schwarzenegger was reportedly academically average but stood out for his cheerful, goodhumored, and exuberant character. he struggled with reading and was later diagnosed as being dyslexic. money was a problem in their household; schwarzenegger recalled that one of the highlights of his youth was when the family bought a refrigerator. his father gustav was an athlete, and wished for his sons to become champions in bavarian curling. influenced by his father, schwarzenegger played several sports as a boy.schwarzenegger began weight training in  when his football coach took his team to a local gym. at age , he chose bodybuilding over football as a career. he later said, i actually started weight training when i was , but id been participating in sports, like soccer, for years, so i felt that although i was slim, i was welldeveloped, at least enough so that i could start going to the gym and start olympic lifting. however, his official website biography claims that at , he started an intensive training program with dan farmer, studied psychology at   and at , officially started his competitive career. during a speech in , he said, my own plan formed when i was  years old. my father had wanted me to be a police officer like he was. my mother wanted me to go to trade school.

schwarzenegger took to visiting a gym in graz, where he also frequented the local movie theaters to see films with bodybuilding idols such as reg park, steve reeves and johnny weissmuller. when reeves died in , schwarzenegger fondly remembered him as a teenager, i grew up with steve reeves. his remarkable accomplishments allowed me a sense of what was possible when others around me didnt always understand my dreams. steve reeves has been part of everything ive ever been fortunate enough to achieve. in , schwarzenegger met former mr. austria kurt marnul, who invited him to train at the gym in graz. he was so dedicated as a youngster that he broke into the local gym on weekends to train even when it was closed. it would make me sick to miss a workout... i knew i couldnt look at myself in the mirror the next morning if i didnt do it. when asked about his first cinema experience as a boy, he replied i was very young, but i remember my father taking me to the austrian theaters and seeing some newsreels. the first real movie i saw, that i distinctly remember, was a john wayne movie. in graz, he was mentored by alfred gerstl, who had jewish ancestry and later became president of the federal council, and befriended his son karl.schwarzeneggers brother, meinhard, died in a car crash on may , . he was driving drunk and died instantly. schwarzenegger did not attend his funeral. meinhard was engaged to erika knapp, and they had a threeyearold son named patrick. schwarzenegger paid for patricks education and helped him to move to the u.s. schwarzeneggers father, gustav, died of a stroke on december , . in pumping iron, schwarzenegger claimed that he did not attend his fathers funeral because he was training for a bodybuilding contest. later, he and the films producer said this story was taken from another bodybuilder to show the extremes some would go to for their sport and to make schwarzeneggers image colder to create controversy for the film. however, barbara baker, his first serious girlfriend, recalled that he informed her of his fathers death without emotion and that he never spoke of his brother. over time, he has given at least three versions of why he was absent from his fathers funeral.in an interview with fortune in , schwarzenegger told how he suffered what would now be called child abuse at the hands of his father my hair was pulled. i was hit with belts. so was the kid next door. it was just the way it was. many of the children ive seen were broken by their parents, which was the germanaustrian mentality. they didnt want to create an individual. it was all about conforming. i was one who did not conform, and whose will could not be broken. therefore, i became a rebel. every time i got hit, and every time someone said, you cant do this, i said, this is not going to be for much longer because im going to move out of here. i want to be rich. i want to be somebody.schwarzenegger served in the austrian army in  to fulfill the one year of service required at the time of all yearold austrian males. during his army service, he won the junior mr. europe contest. he went awol during basic training so he could take part in the competition and then spent a week in military prison participating in the competition meant so much to me that i didnt carefully think through the consequences. he entered another bodybuilding contest in graz, at steirerhof hotel, where he placed second. he was voted bestbuilt man of europe, which made him famous in bodybuilding circles. the mr. universe title was my ticket to americathe land of opportunity, where i could become a star and get rich. schwarzenegger made his first plane trip in , attending the nabba mr. universe competition in london. he placed second in the mr. universe competition, not having the muscle definition of american winner chester yorton.charles wag bennett, one of the judges at the  competition, was impressed with schwarzenegger and offered to coach him. as schwarzenegger had little money, bennett invited him to stay in his crowded family home above one of his two gyms in forest gate, london. yortons leg definition had been judged superior, and schwarzenegger, under a training program devised by bennett, concentrated on improving his. staying in the east end of london helped schwarzenegger improve his rudimentary english. living with the bennetts also changed him as a person being with them made me so much more sophisticated. when youre the age i was then, youre always looking for approval, for love, for attention and also for guidance. at the time, i wasnt really aware of that. but now, looking back, i see that the bennett family fulfilled all those needs. especially my need to be the best in the world. to be recognized and to feel unique and special. they saw that i needed that care and attention and love.also in , at bennetts home, schwarzenegger had the opportunity to meet childhood idol reg park, who became his friend and mentor. the training paid off and, in , schwarzenegger won the title for the first time, becoming the youngest ever mr. universe at age . he would go on to win the title another three times. he then returned to munich, where he attended business school and worked at rolf putzigers gym, where he worked and trained from  to  before returning to london in  to win his next mr. universe title. he frequently told roger c. field, his english coach and friend in munich at the time, im going to become the greatest actorschwarzenegger, who dreamed of moving to the us since age ten, and saw bodybuilding as his avenue of opportunity, realized his dream by moving to the us in october  at age , speaking little english. there he trained at golds gym in venice, los angeles, california, under joe weiders supervision. from  to , one of schwarzeneggers weight training partners was ric drasin, a professional wrestler who designed the original golds gym logo in . schwarzenegger also became good friends with professional wrestler superstar billy graham. in , at age , schwarzenegger captured his first mr. olympia title in new york, and would go on to win the title seven times.the immigration law firm siskind  susser has stated that schwarzenegger may have been an illegal immigrant at some point in the late s or early s because of violations in the terms of his visa. la weekly said in  that schwarzenegger was the most famous us immigrant, who overcame a thick austrian accent and transcended the unlikely background of bodybuilding to become the biggest movie star in the world in the s.in , schwarzeneggers autobiography and weighttraining guide, arnold the education of a bodybuilder, was a huge success. in , he posed for the gay magazine after dark. after taking an assortment of courses at santa monica college in california , as well as further upper division classes at the university of california, los angeles as part of uclas extension program, he accumulated enough credits to be within striking distance of graduation. in , he enrolled in the university of wisconsinsuperior as a distance education student, completing most of his coursework by correspondence and flying out to superior to meet professors and take final exams. in may , he formally graduated and earned his bachelors degree in business administration and marketing. he received his united states citizenship in . he received an honorary degree from stockton university in .

schwarzenegger is considered among the most important figures in the history of bodybuilding, and his legacy is commemorated in the arnold classic annual bodybuilding competition. he has remained a prominent face in bodybuilding long after his retirement, in part because of his ownership of gyms and fitness magazines. he has presided over numerous contests and awards shows.

for many years, he wrote a monthly column for the bodybuilding magazines muscle  fitness and flex. shortly after being elected governor, he was appointed the executive editor of both magazines, in a largely symbolic capacity. the magazines agreed to donate , a year to the governors various physical fitness initiatives. when the deal, including the contract that gave schwarzenegger at least  million a year, was made public in , many criticized it as being a conflict of interest since the governors office made decisions concerning regulation of dietary supplements in california. consequently, schwarzenegger relinquished the executive editor role in . american media inc., which owns muscle  fitness and flex, announced in march  that schwarzenegger had accepted their renewed offer to be executive editor of the magazines.one of the first competitions he won was the junior mr. europe contest in . he won mr. europe the following year, at age . he would go on to compete in many bodybuilding contests, and win most of them. his bodybuilding victories included five mr. universe wins , and seven mr. olympia wins, a record which would stand until lee haney won his eighth consecutive mr. olympia title in .

schwarzenegger continues to work out. when asked about his personal training during the  arnold classic he said that he was still working out a half an hour with weights every day.

during schwarzeneggers early years in bodybuilding, he also competed in several olympic weightlifting and powerlifting contests. schwarzeneggers first professional competition was in  and he won two weightlifting contests in  and , as well as two powerlifting contests in  and .in , schwarzenegger won the munich stonelifting contest, in which a stone weighing  german pounds  is lifted between the legs while standing on two footrests.

clean and press   lb 

snatch   lb 

clean and jerk   lb 

squat   lb 

bench press   lb 

deadlift   lb 

schwarzeneggers goal was to become the greatest bodybuilder in the world, which meant becoming mr. olympia. his first attempt was in , when he lost to threetime champion sergio oliva. however, schwarzenegger came back in  and won the competition, making him the youngest ever mr. olympia at the age of , a record he still holds to this day.he continued his winning streak in the  competitions. he also toured different countries selling vitamins, as in helsinki, finland in , when he lived at the ymca hotel hospiz  on vuorikatu and presented vitamin pills at the stockmann shopping center. in , schwarzenegger was once again in top form, and won the title for the sixth consecutive time, beating franco columbu. after the  mr. olympia contest, schwarzenegger announced his retirement from professional bodybuilding.months before the  mr. olympia contest, filmmakers george butler and robert fiore persuaded schwarzenegger to compete and film his training in the bodybuilding documentary called pumping iron. schwarzenegger had only three months to prepare for the competition, after losing significant weight to appear in the film stay hungry with jeff bridges. although significantly taller and heavier, lou ferrigno proved not to be a threat, and a lighterthanusual schwarzenegger convincingly won the  mr. olympia.

schwarzenegger came out of retirement, however, to compete in the  mr. olympia. schwarzenegger was training for his role in conan, and he got into such good shape because of the running, horseback riding and sword training, that he decided he wanted to win the mr. olympia contest one last time. he kept this plan a secret in the event that a training accident would prevent his entry and cause him to lose face. schwarzenegger had been hired to provide color commentary for network television when he announced at the eleventh hour that, while he was there, why not compete schwarzenegger ended up winning the event with only seven weeks of preparation. having been declared mr. olympia for a seventh time, schwarzenegger then officially retired from competition. this victory  was highly controversial, though, as fellow competitors and many observers felt that his lack of muscle mass  and subpar conditioning should have precluded him from winning against a very competitive lineup that year. mike mentzer, in particular, felt cheated and withdrew from competitive bodybuilding after that contest.

schwarzenegger has acknowledged using performanceenhancing anabolic steroids while they were legal, writing in  that steroids were helpful to me in maintaining muscle size while on a strict diet in preparation for a contest. i did not use them for muscle growth, but rather for muscle maintenance when cutting up. he has called the drugs tissue building.in , schwarzenegger sued willi heepe, a german doctor who publicly predicted his early death on the basis of a link between his steroid use and later heart problems. since the doctor never examined him personally, schwarzenegger collected a us, libel judgment against him in a german court. in , schwarzenegger also sued and settled with globe, a u.s. tabloid which had made similar predictions about the bodybuilders future health.

height  ft  in 

contest weight  lb the lightest in  mr. olympia around  lb , the heaviest in  mr. olympia around  lb 

offseason weight  lb 

chest  in 

waist  in 

arms  in 

thighs . in 

calves  in 

schwarzenegger wanted to move from bodybuilding into acting, finally achieving it when he was chosen to play the title role in hercules in new york . credited under the stage name arnold strong, his accent in the film was so thick that his lines were dubbed after production. his second film appearance was as a mob hitman in the long goodbye , which was followed by a much more significant part in the film stay hungry , for which he won the golden globe award for new star of the year  actor. schwarzenegger has discussed his early struggles in developing his acting career it was very difficult for me in the beginning  i was told by agents and casting people that my body was too weird, that i had a funny accent, and that my name was too long. you name it, and they told me i had to change it. basically, everywhere i turned, i was told that i had no chance.

schwarzenegger drew attention and boosted his profile in the bodybuilding film pumping iron , elements of which were dramatized. in , he purchased the rights to the film, its outtakes, and associated still photography. in , he made guest appearances in single episodes of the abc sitcom the san pedro beach bums and the abc police procedural the streets of san francisco. schwarzenegger auditioned for the title role of the incredible hulk, but did not win the role because of his height. later, lou ferrigno got the part of dr. david banners alter ego. schwarzenegger appeared with kirk douglas and annmargret in the  comedy the villain. in , he starred in a biographical film of the s actress jayne mansfield as mansfields husband, mickey hargitay.

schwarzeneggers breakthrough film was the sword and sorcery epic conan the barbarian in , which was a boxoffice hit. this was followed by a sequel, conan the destroyer, in , although it was not as successful as its predecessor. in , schwarzenegger starred in the promotional video carnival in rio. in , he made his first appearance as the eponymous character in james camerons science fiction action film the terminator. it has been called his acting careers signature role. following this, schwarzenegger made another sword and sorcery film, red sonja, in . during the s, audiences had an appetite for action films, with both schwarzenegger and sylvester stallone becoming international stars. during the schwarzeneggerstallone rivalry they attacked each other in the press, and tried to surpass the other with more onscreen killings and larger weapons. schwarzeneggers roles reflected his sense of humor, separating him from more serious action hero films. he made a number of successful action films in the s, such as commando , raw deal , the running man , predator , and red heat .

twins , a comedy with danny devito, also proved successful. total recall  netted schwarzenegger  million  and  of the films gross. a science fiction script, the film was based on the philip k. dick short story we can remember it for you wholesale. kindergarten cop  reunited him with director ivan reitman, who directed him in twins. schwarzenegger had a brief foray into directing, first with a  episode of the tv series tales from the crypt, entitled the switch, and then with the  telemovie christmas in connecticut. he has not directed since.

schwarzeneggers commercial peak was his return as the title character in terminator  judgment day , which was the highestgrossing film of the year. film critic roger ebert commented that schwarzeneggers genius as a movie star is to find roles that build on, rather than undermine, his physical and vocal characteristics. in , the national association of theatre owners named him the international star of the decade. his next film project, the  selfaware action comedy spoof last action hero, was released opposite jurassic park, and did not do well at the box office. his next film, the comedy drama true lies , was a popular spy film and saw schwarzenegger reunited with james cameron.

that same year, the comedy junior was released, the last of schwarzeneggers three collaborations with ivan reitman and again costarring danny devito. this film brought him his second golden globe nomination, this time for best actor  motion picture musical or comedy. it was followed by the action thriller eraser , the christmas comedy jingle all the way , and the comic bookbased batman  robin , in which he played the villain mr. freeze. this was his final film before taking time to recuperate from a back injury. following the critical failure of batman  robin, his film career and box office prominence went into decline. he returned with the supernatural thriller end of days , later followed by the action films the th day  and collateral damage , both of which failed to do well at the box office. in , he made his third appearance as the title character in terminator  rise of the machines, which went on to earn over  million domestically .

in tribute to schwarzenegger in , forum stadtpark, a local cultural association, proposed plans to build a metertall  terminator statue in a park in central graz. schwarzenegger reportedly said he was flattered, but thought the money would be better spent on social projects and the special olympics.

his film appearances after becoming governor of california included a threesecond cameo appearance in the rundown and the  remake of around the world in  days. in , he appeared as himself in the film the kid  i. he voiced baron von steuben in the libertys kids episode valley forge. he had been rumored to be appearing in terminator salvation as the original t; he denied his involvement, but he ultimately did appear briefly via his image being inserted into the movie from stock footage of the first terminator movie. schwarzenegger appeared in sylvester stallones the expendables, where he made a cameo appearance.

in january , just weeks after leaving office in california, schwarzenegger announced that he was reading several new scripts for future films, one of them being the world war ii action drama with wings as eagles, written by randall wallace, based on a true story.on march , , at the arnold seminar of the arnold classic, schwarzenegger revealed that he was being considered for several films, including sequels to the terminator and remakes of predator and the running man, and that he was packaging a comic book character. the character was later revealed to be the governator, star of the comic book and animated series of the same name. schwarzenegger inspired the character and codeveloped it with stan lee, who would have produced the series. schwarzenegger would have voiced the governator.on may , , schwarzeneggers entertainment counsel announced that all film projects currently in development were being halted schwarzenegger is focusing on personal matters and is not willing to commit to any production schedules or timelines. on july , , it was announced that schwarzenegger was considering a comeback film, despite legal problems related to his divorce. he starred in the expendables   as trench mauser, and starred in the last stand , his first leading role in  years, and escape plan , his first costarring role alongside sylvester stallone. he starred in sabotage, released in march , and returned as trench mauser in the expendables , released in august . he starred in the fifth terminator film terminator genisys in , and would reprise his role as conan the barbarian in the legend of conan, later renamed conan the conqueror. however, in april , producer chris morgan stated that universal had dropped the project, although there was a possibility of a tv show. the story of the film was supposed to be set  years after the first, with some inspiration from clint eastwoods unforgiven.in august , his filming of actioncomedy killing gunther was temporarily interrupted by bank robbers near the filming location in surrey, british columbia. the film was released in september . he was announced to star and produce in a film about the ruins of sanxingdui called the guest of sanxingdui as an ambassador.on february , , amazon studios announced they were working with schwarzenegger to develop a new series entitled outrider in which he will star and executive produce. the westerndrama set in the oklahoma indian territory in the late th century will follow a deputy  who is tasked with apprehending a legendary outlaw in the wilderness, but is forced to partner with a ruthless federal marshal to make sure justice is properly served. the series will also mark as schwarzeneggers first major scripted tv role.schwarzenegger returned to the terminator franchise with terminator dark fate, which was released on november , . it was produced by the series cocreator james cameron, who directed him previously in the first two films in the series and in true lies. it was shot in almera, hungary and the us.

in september , the media announced that schwarzenegger was to replace donald trump as host of the new celebrity apprentice. this show, the th season of the apprentice, aired during the  tv season. in the show, he used the phrases youre terminated and get to the choppa, which are quotes from some of his famous roles , when firing the contestants.in march , following repeated criticisms from trump, schwarzenegger announced that he would not return for another season on the show. he also reacted to trumps remarks in january  via instagram hey, donald, i have a great idea. why dont we switch jobs you take over tv because youre such an expert in ratings, and i take over your job, and then people can finally sleep comfortably again.

schwarzenegger has been a registered republican for many years. when he was an actor, his political views were always well known as they contrasted with those of many other prominent hollywood stars, who are generally considered to be a leftwing and democraticleaning community. at the  republican national convention, schwarzenegger gave a speech and explained that he was a republican because he believed the democrats of the s sounded too much like austrian socialists.

i finally arrived here in . what a special day it was. i remember i arrived here with empty pockets but full of dreams, full of determination, full of desire. the presidential campaign was in full swing. i remember watching the nixonhumphrey presidential race on tv. a friend of mine who spoke german and english translated for me. i heard humphrey saying things that sounded like socialism, which i had just left.

but then i heard nixon speak. he was talking about free enterprise, getting the government off your back, lowering the taxes and strengthening the military. listening to nixon speak sounded more like a breath of fresh air. i said to my friend, i said, what party is he my friend said, hes a republican. i said, then i am a republican. and i have been a republican ever since.

in , schwarzenegger appeared in stop the madness, an antidrug music video sponsored by the reagan administration. he first came to wide public notice as a republican during the  presidential election, accompanying thenvice president george h. w. bush at a campaign rally.

schwarzenegger famously introduced the first episode of the  milton friedman hosted pbs series free to choose stating i truly believe that the series has changed my life, and when you have such a powerful experience as that, i think you shouldnt keep it to yourself, so i wanted to share it with you. being free to choose for me means being free to make your own decisions, free to live your own life, pursue your own goals, chase your own rainbow without the government breathing down on your neck or standing on your shoes. for me that meant coming here to america, because i came from a socialistic country where the government controls the economy. its a place where you can hear yearold kids already talking about their pension. but me, i wanted more. i wanted to be the best. individualism like that is incompatible with socialism. so i felt i had to come to america. schwarzenegger goes on to tell of how he and his then wife maria shriver were in palm springs preparing to play a game of mixed doubles when milton friedmans famous show came on the television. schwarzenegger recalls that while watching friedmans free to choose, schwarzenegger, ...recognized friedman from the study of my own degree in economics, but i didnt know i was watching free to choose... it knocked me out. dr. friedman expressed, validated and explained everything i ever thought or experienced or observed about the way the economy works, and i guess i was really ready to hear it. numerous critics state that schwarzenegger strayed from much of friedmans economic ways of thinking in later years, especially upon being elected governor of california from  through .schwarzeneggers first political appointment was as chairman of the presidents council on physical fitness and sports, on which he served from  to . he was nominated by the thenpresident bush, who dubbed him conan the republican. he later served as chairman for the california governors council on physical fitness and sports under governor pete wilson.

between  and , schwarzenegger was a red cross ambassador , recording several television and radio public service announcements to donate blood.

in an interview with talk magazine in late , schwarzenegger was asked if he thought of running for office. he replied, i think about it many times. the possibility is there because i feel it inside. the hollywood reporter claimed shortly after that schwarzenegger sought to end speculation that he might run for governor of california. following his initial comments, schwarzenegger said, im in show business  i am in the middle of my career. why would i go away from that and jump into something else

schwarzenegger announced his candidacy in the  california recall election for governor of california on the august , , episode of the tonight show with jay leno. schwarzenegger had the most name recognition in a crowded field of candidates, but he had never held public office and his political views were unknown to most californians. his candidacy immediately became national and international news, with media outlets dubbing him the governator  and the running man , and calling the recall election total recall . schwarzenegger declined to participate in several debates with other recall replacement candidates, and appeared in only one debate on september , .

on october , , the recall election resulted in governor gray davis being removed from office with . of the yes vote in favor of a recall. schwarzenegger was elected governor of california under the second question on the ballot with . of the vote to choose a successor to davis. schwarzenegger defeated democrat cruz bustamante, fellow republican tom mcclintock, and others. his nearest rival, bustamante, received  of the vote. in total, schwarzenegger won the election by about . million votes. under the regulations of the california constitution, no runoff election was required. schwarzenegger was the second foreignborn governor of california after irishborn governor john g. downey in .

schwarzenegger is a moderate republican. he says he is fiscally conservative and socially liberal. on the issue of abortion, he describes himself as prochoice, but supports parental notification for minors and a ban on partialbirth abortion. he has supported gay rights, such as domestic partnerships, and he performed a samesex marriage as governor. however, schwarzenegger vetoed bills that would have legalized samesex marriage in california in  and . he additionally vetoed two bills that would have implemented a singlepayer health care system in california in  and , respectively.

schwarzenegger was entrenched in what he considered to be his mandate in cleaning up political gridlock. building on a catchphrase from the sketch hans and franz from saturday night live , schwarzenegger called the democratic state politicians girlie men.

schwarzeneggers early victories included repealing an unpopular increase in the vehicle registration fee as well as preventing drivers licenses from being given out to illegal immigrants, but later he began to feel the backlash when powerful state unions began to oppose his various initiatives. key among his reckoning with political realities was a special election he called in november , in which four ballot measures he sponsored were defeated. schwarzenegger accepted personal responsibility for the defeats and vowed to continue to seek consensus for the people of california. he would later comment that no one could win if the opposition raised  million dollars to defeat you. the u.s. supreme court later found the public employee unions use of compulsory fundraising during the campaign had been illegal in knox v. service employees international union, local .

schwarzenegger, against the advice of fellow republican strategists, appointed a democrat, susan kennedy, as his chief of staff. he gradually moved towards a more politically moderate position, determined to build a winning legacy with only a short time to go until the next gubernatorial election.

schwarzenegger ran for reelection against democrat phil angelides, the california state treasurer, in the  elections, held on november , . despite a poor year nationally for the republican party, schwarzenegger won reelection with . of the vote compared with . for angelides, a margin of well over  million votes. around this time, many commentators saw schwarzenegger as moving away from the right and towards the center of the political spectrum. after hearing a speech by schwarzenegger at the  martin luther king jr. day breakfast, in which schwarzenegger said, in part how wrong i was when i said everyone has an equal opportunity to make it in america ... the state of california does not provide  education for all of our children, san francisco mayor  future governor of california gavin newsom said that hes becoming a democrat ... hes running back, not even to the center. i would say centerleft.some speculated that schwarzenegger might run for the united states senate in , as his governorship would be termlimited by that time. such rumors turned out to be false.

wendy leigh, who wrote an unofficial biography on schwarzenegger, claims he plotted his political rise from an early age using the movie business and bodybuilding as the means to escape a depressing home. leigh portrays schwarzenegger as obsessed with power and quotes him as saying, i wanted to be part of the small percentage of people who were leaders, not the large mass of followers. i think it is because i saw leaders use  of their potential  i was always fascinated by people in control of other people. schwarzenegger has said that it was never his intention to enter politics, but he says, i married into a political family. you get together with them and you hear about policy, about reaching out to help people. i was exposed to the idea of being a public servant and eunice and sargent shriver became my heroes. eunice kennedy shriver was the sister of john f. kennedy, and motherinlaw to schwarzenegger; sargent shriver is husband to eunice and fatherinlaw to schwarzenegger.

schwarzenegger cannot run for u.s. president as he is not a naturalborn citizen of the united states. schwarzenegger is a dual austrian and united states citizen. he has held austrian citizenship since birth and u.s. citizenship since becoming naturalized in . being austrian and thus european, he was able to win the  european voice campaigner of the year award for taking action against climate change with the california global warming solutions act of  and plans to introduce an emissions trading scheme with other us states and possibly with the eu.

because of his personal wealth from his acting career, schwarzenegger did not accept his governors salary of , per year.schwarzeneggers endorsement in the republican primary of the  u.s. presidential election was highly sought; despite being good friends with candidates rudy giuliani and senator john mccain, schwarzenegger remained neutral throughout  and early . giuliani dropped out of the presidential race on january , , largely because of a poor showing in florida, and endorsed mccain. later that night, schwarzenegger was in the audience at a republican debate at the ronald reagan presidential library in california. the following day, he endorsed mccain, joking, its rudys fault . schwarzeneggers endorsement was thought to be a boost for senator mccains campaign; both spoke about their concerns for the environment and economy.in its april  report, progressive ethics watchdog group citizens for responsibility and ethics in washington named schwarzenegger one of  worst governors in the united states because of various ethics issues throughout schwarzeneggers term as governor.governor schwarzenegger played a significant role in opposing proposition , a proposed amendment of the californian three strikes law, in november . this amendment would have required the third felony to be either violent or serious to mandate a yearstolife sentence. in the last week before the ballot, schwarzenegger launched an intense campaign against proposition . he stated that it would release , dangerous criminals and rapists.although he began his tenure as governor with record high approval ratings , he left office with a nearrecord low  only one percent higher than that of gray davis, when he was recalled in october .

in may , esteban nez pleaded guilty to voluntary manslaughter and was sentenced to  years in prison for the death of luis santos. nez is the son of fabian nez, then california assembly speaker of the house and a close friend and staunch political ally of then governor schwarzenegger.as a personal favor to a friend, just hours before he left office, and as one of his last official acts, schwarzenegger commuted nezs sentence by more than half, to seven years. he believed that nezs sentence was excessive in comparison with the same prison term imposed on ryan jett, the man who fatally stabbed santos. against protocol, schwarzenegger did not inform santos family or the san diego county prosecutors about the commutation. they learned about it in a call from a reporter.the santos family, along with the san diego district attorney, sued to stop the commutation, claiming that it violated marsys law. in september , sacramento county superior court judge lloyd connelly stated, based on the evidentiary records before this court involving this case, there was an abuse of discretion...this was a distasteful commutation. it was repugnant to the bulk of the citizenry of this state. however, connelly ruled that schwarzenegger remained within his executive powers as governor. subsequently, as a direct result of the way the commutation was handled, governor jerry brown signed a bipartisan bill that allows offenders victims and their families to be notified at least  days before any commutations. nez was released from prison after serving less than six years.

during his initial campaign for governor in , allegations of sexual and personal misconduct were raised against schwarzenegger. within the last five days before the election, news reports appeared in the los angeles times recounting decadesold allegations of sexual misconduct from six individual women. schwarzenegger responded to the allegations in  admitting that he has behaved badly sometimes and apologized, but also stated that a lot of what you see in the stories is not true. one of the women who came forward was british television personality anna richardson, who settled a libel lawsuit in august  against schwarzenegger; his top aide, sean walsh; and his publicist, sheryl main. a joint statement read the parties are content to put this matter behind them and are pleased that this legal dispute has now been settled. in , schwarzenegger revisited the issue while promoting his new threepart biographical documentary on netflix called arnold. schwarzenegger stated that he was totally wrong.during this time a  interview in adult magazine oui gained attention, in which schwarzenegger discussed using substances such as marijuana. schwarzenegger is shown smoking a marijuana joint after winning mr. olympia in  in the documentary film pumping iron . in an interview with gq magazine in october , schwarzenegger said, marijuana is not a drug. its a leaf. my drug was pumping iron, trust me. his spokesperson later said the comment was meant to be a joke.

schwarzenegger became a naturalized u.s. citizen on september , . shortly before he gained his citizenship, he asked the austrian authorities for the right to keep his austrian citizenship, as austria does not usually allow dual citizenship. his request was granted, and he retained his austrian citizenship. in , peter pilz, a member of the austrian parliament from the austrian green party, unsuccessfully advocated for parliament to revoke schwarzeneggers austrian citizenship due to his decision not to prevent the executions of donald beardslee and stanley williams. pilz argued that schwarzenegger caused damage to austrias reputation in the international community because austria abolished the death penalty in . pilz based his argument on article  of the austrian citizenship act, which states a citizen, who is in the public service of a foreign country, shall be deprived of his citizenship if he heavily damages the reputation or the interests of the austrian republic. pilz claimed that schwarzeneggers actions in support of the death penalty  had damaged austrias reputation. schwarzenegger explained his actions by pointing out that his only duty as governor of california with respect to the death penalty was to correct an error by the justice system by pardon or clemency if such an error had occurred.

on september , , schwarzenegger signed the global warming solutions act of , creating the nations first cap on greenhouse gas emissions. the law set new regulations on the amount of emissions utilities, refineries, and manufacturing plants are allowed to release into the atmosphere. schwarzenegger also signed a second global warming bill that prohibits large utilities and corporations in california from making longterm contracts with suppliers who do not meet the states greenhouse gas emission standards. the two bills are part of a plan to reduce californias emissions by  percent to s levels by . in , schwarzenegger issued an executive order calling to reduce greenhouse gases to  percent below  levels by .schwarzenegger signed another executive order on october , , allowing california to work with the northeasts regional greenhouse gas initiative. they plan to reduce carbon dioxide emissions by issuing a limited amount of carbon credits to each power plant in participating states. any power plants that exceed emissions for the number of carbon credits will have to purchase more credits to cover the difference. the plan took effect in . in addition to using his political power to fight global warming, the governor has taken steps at his home to reduce his personal carbon footprint. schwarzenegger has adapted one of his hummers to run on hydrogen and another to run on biofuels. he has also installed solar panels to heat his home.in respect for his contribution to the direction of the us motor industry, schwarzenegger was invited to open the  sae world congress in detroit on april , .in , schwarzenegger founded the r regions of climate action to develop a sustainable, lowcarbon economy. in , he joined french president emmanuel macron in calling for the adoption of a global pact for the environment.

in , schwarzenegger launched the austrian world summit, an international climate conference that is held annually in vienna, austria. the austrian world summit is organized by the schwarzenegger climate initiative and aims is to bring together representatives from politics, civil society and business to create a broad alliance for climate protection and to identify concrete solutions to the climate crisis.

presidential aspirations by the austrianborn schwarzenegger would be blocked by a constitutional hurdle; article ii, section i, clause v prevents individuals who are not naturalborn citizens of the united states from assuming the office. the equal opportunity to govern amendment in  was widely accredited as the amend for arnold bill, which would have added an amendment to the u.s. constitution allowing his run. in , the amend for arnold campaign was launched, featuring a website and tv advertising promotion.in june , schwarzenegger was featured on the cover of time magazine with michael bloomberg, and subsequently, the two joked about a presidential ticket together.

schwarzenegger has also enjoyed a highly successful business career. following his move to the united states, schwarzenegger became a prolific goal setter and would write his objectives at the start of the year on index cards, like starting a mail order business or buying a new car  and succeed in doing so. as a result of his early business and investment success, schwarzenegger became a millionaire by the age of , well before making a name for himself in hollywood. his path to financial independence came as a result of his success as a proactive businessman and investor involved with a series of lucrative business ventures and real estate investments.

in , schwarzenegger and fellow bodybuilder franco columbu started a bricklaying business. the business flourished thanks to the pairs marketing savvy and an increased demand following the  san fernando earthquake. when signs of profitability emerged as business began to pick up, schwarzenegger and columbu rolled over the profits from their bricklaying venture to start a mailorder business that sold bodybuilding and fitnessrelated equipment and instructional tapes.

schwarzenegger transferred profits from the mailorder business and his bodybuildingcompetition winnings by rolling the proceeds into his first real estate investment an apartment building he purchased for ,. schwarzenegger would later go on to invest in a number of real estate holding companies and investment ventures across the united states and around the world.schwarzenegger and fellow hollywood veteran actor and industry adversary sylvester stallone brought their longstoried industry rivalry to an end by both investing in the planet hollywood chain of international theme restaurants  along with bruce willis and demi moore. however, schwarzenegger severed his financial ties with the chain in early . schwarzenegger remarked that the restaurant did not achieve the success that he had hoped for, claiming he wanted to focus his attention on new us global business ventures and his thenburgeoning acting career.schwarzenegger also made a private commercial real estate investment in the easton town center, a shopping mall located in columbus, ohio. he has talked about some of those who have helped him over the years in business i couldnt have learned about business without a parade of teachers guiding me... from milton friedman to donald trump... and now, les wexner and warren buffett. i even learned a thing or two from planet hollywood, such as when to get out and i did he has significant equity ownership in dimensional fund advisors, an austinbased investment firm. schwarzenegger is also the owner of arnolds sports festival, a sports and fitness festival which he started in  and is held annually in columbus, ohio. it is a festival that hosts thousands of international health and fitness professionals which has also expanded into a threeday expo. he also owns a film production company called oak productions, inc. and fitness publications, a joint book publishing venture partnered with simon  schuster.in , schwarzenegger partnered with basketball player lebron james to establish ladder, a company that developed nutritional supplements to help athletes with severe cramps. the pair sold ladder to openfit for an undisclosed amount in  after reporting more than  million in sales for that year.

in , schwarzenegger and his wife opened a restaurant in santa monica called schatzi on main. schatzi literally means little treasure, and colloquially honey or darling in german. in , he sold his restaurant.

schwarzeneggers net worth had been conservatively estimated at  million to  million. after separating from his wife, maria shriver, in , it was estimated that his net worth had been approximately  million, and even as high as  million, based on tax returns he filed in . over the years, he shrewdly invested his bodybuilding and film earnings in an extensive array of stocks, bonds, privately controlled companies, and investmentgrade real estate across the united states and worldwide, making his net worth difficult to accurately calculate, particularly in light of declining real estate values owing to economic recessions in the united states and europe that occurred during the late s. in june , he spent  million of his own money on a private gulfstream jet. regarding his private fortune, schwarzenegger once quipped money doesnt make you happy. i now have  million, but i was just as happy when i had  million.

schwarzenegger has also appeared in a series of commercials for the machine zone game mobile strike as a military commander and spokesman.

in , schwarzenegger met barbara outland , an english teacher with whom he lived until . schwarzenegger said of baker in his  memoir, basically it came down to this she was a wellbalanced woman who wanted an ordinary, solid life, and i was not a wellbalanced man, and hated the very idea of ordinary life. baker has described schwarzenegger as a joyful personality, totally charismatic, adventurous, and athletic but claims that towards the end of the relationship he became insufferableclassically conceitedthe world revolved around him. baker published her memoir in , entitled arnold and me in the shadow of the austrian oak. although baker painted an unflattering portrait of her former lover at times, schwarzenegger actually contributed to the tellall book with a foreword, and also met with baker for three hours.baker claims that she only learned of his being unfaithful after they split, and talks of a turbulent and passionate love life. schwarzenegger has made it clear that their respective recollection of events can differ. the couple first met six to eight months after his arrival in the u.s. their first date was watching the first apollo moon landing on television. they shared an apartment in santa monica, california, for three and a half years, and having little money, they would visit the beach all day or have barbecues in the back yard. although baker claims that when she first met schwarzenegger, he had little understanding of polite society and she found him a turnoff, she says, hes as much a selfmade man as its possible to behe never got encouragement from his parents, his family, his brother. he just had this huge determination to prove himself, and that was very attractive ... ill go to my grave knowing arnold loved me.schwarzenegger met his next lover, beverly hills hairdressers assistant sue moray, on venice beach in july . according to moray, the couple led an open relationship we were faithful when we were both in la... but when he was out of town, we were free to do whatever we wanted. schwarzenegger met television journalist maria shriver, niece of president john f. kennedy, at the robert f. kennedy tennis tournament in august . he went on to have a relationship with both moray and shriver until august  when moray  issued an ultimatum.

on april , , schwarzenegger married shriver in hyannis, massachusetts. they have four children, including katherine schwarzenegger and patrick schwarzenegger. all of their children were born in los angeles. the family lived in an ,squarefoot  home in the brentwood neighborhood of los angeles, california, with vacation homes in sun valley, idaho, and hyannis port, massachusetts. they attended st. monicas catholic church.

on may , , shriver and schwarzenegger ended their relationship after  years of marriage with shriver moving out of their brentwood mansion. on may , , the los angeles times revealed that schwarzenegger had fathered a son more than  years earlier with an employee in their household, mildred patricia patty baena. after leaving the governors office i told my wife about this event, which occurred over a decade ago, schwarzenegger said to the times. in the statement, schwarzenegger did not mention that he had confessed to his wife only after she had confronted him with the information, which she had done after confirming with the housekeeper what she had suspected about the child.baena is of guatemalan origin. she was employed by the family for  years and retired in january . the pregnant baena was working in the home while shriver was pregnant with the youngest of the couples four children. baenas son with schwarzenegger was born days after shriver gave birth. schwarzenegger said that it took seven or eight years before he found out that he had fathered a child with his housekeeper. it was not until the boy started looking like him ... that he put things together. schwarzenegger has taken financial responsibility for the child from the start and continued to provide support. knx  radio reported that, in , he bought a new fourbedroom house with a pool for baena and their son in bakersfield, california. baena separated from her husband, rogelio, a few months after josephs birth. she filed for divorce in . rogelio said that the childs birth certificate was falsified and that he planned to sue schwarzenegger for engaging in conspiracy to falsify a public document, a serious crime in california.pursuant to the divorce judgment, schwarzenegger kept the brentwood home, while shriver purchased a new home nearby so that the children could travel between their parents homes. they shared custody of the two youngest children. schwarzenegger came under fire after the initial petition did not include spousal support and a reimbursement of attorneys fees. however, he claims this was not intentional and that he signed the initial documents without having properly read them. he filed amended divorce papers remedying this. schwarzenegger and shriver finalized their divorce in , ten years after separating.in june , a jury ruled that maria shriver was entitled to half of her exhusbands postdivorce savings that he earned from  to , including a pension.after the scandal, danishitalian actress brigitte nielsen came forward and stated that she too had an affair with schwarzenegger during the production of red sonja, while he had just started his relationship with shriver. when asked in january , of all the things you are famous for ... which are you least proud of schwarzenegger replied, im least proud of the mistakes i made that caused my family pain and split us up.

schwarzenegger was born with a bicuspid aortic valve, an aortic valve with only two leaflets, where a normal aortic valve has three. he opted in  for a replacement heart valve made from his own pulmonic valve, which itself was replaced with a cadaveric pulmonic valve, in a ross procedure; medical experts predicted he would require pulmonic heart valve replacement surgery within the next two to eight years because his valve would progressively degrade. schwarzenegger apparently opted against a mechanical valve, the only permanent solution available at the time of his surgery, because it would have sharply limited his physical activity and capacity to exercise.on march , , schwarzenegger underwent emergency openheart surgery for replacement of his replacement pulmonic valve. he said about his recovery i underwent openheart surgery this spring, i had to use a walker. i had to do breathing exercises five times a day to retrain my lungs. i was frustrated and angry, and in my worst moments, i couldnt see the way back to my old self.in ,  years after his first surgery, schwarzenegger underwent a surgery for a new aortic valve.

on december , , he broke six ribs and was hospitalized for four days after a motorcycle crash in los angeles.schwarzenegger saved a drowning man in  while on vacation in hawaii by swimming out and bringing him back to shore.on january , , while schwarzenegger was riding his harley davidson motorcycle in los angeles with his son patrick in the sidecar, another driver backed into the street he was riding on, causing him and his son to collide with the car at a low speed. while his son and the other driver were unharmed, schwarzenegger sustained an injury to his lip requiring  stitches. no citations were issued, said officer jason lee, a los angeles police department spokesman. schwarzenegger did not obtain his motorcycle license until july , .schwarzenegger tripped over his ski pole and broke his right femur while skiing in sun valley, idaho, with his family on december , . on december , he underwent a minute operation in which cables and screws were used to wire the broken bone back together. he was released from st. johns health center on december , .schwarzeneggers private jet made an emergency landing at van nuys airport on june , , after the pilot reported smoke coming from the cockpit, according to a statement released by his press secretary. no one was harmed in the incident.on may , , while on a visit to south africa, schwarzenegger was attacked and dropkicked from behind by an unknown malefactor while giving autographs to his fans at one of the local schools. despite the surprise and unprovoked nature of the attack, he reportedly suffered no injuries and continued to interact with fans. the attacker was apprehended and schwarzenegger declined to press charges against him.schwarzenegger was involved in a multivehicle collision on the afternoon of friday, january , . schwarzenegger was driving a black gmc yukon suv near the intersections of sunset blvd and allenford ave in the brentwood neighborhood of los angeles, when his vehicle collided with a red toyota prius. the driver of the prius was transported to the hospital for injuries sustained to her head. schwarzenegger was uninjured.

schwarzeneggers official height of  ft  in  has been brought into question by several articles. during his bodybuilding days in the late s, it was claimed that he measured  ft . in . however, in , both the daily mail and time out magazine mentioned that schwarzenegger appeared noticeably shorter. prior to running for governor, schwarzeneggers height was once again questioned in an article by the chicago reader. as governor, schwarzenegger engaged in a lighthearted exchange with assemblyman herb wesson over their heights. at one point, wesson made an unsuccessful attempt to, in his own words, settle this once and for all and find out how tall he is by using a tailors tape measure on the governor. schwarzenegger retaliated by placing a pillow stitched with the words need a lift on the fivefootfiveinch  wessons chair before a negotiating session in his office. democrat bob mulholland also claimed schwarzenegger was  ft  in  and that he wore risers in his boots. in , mens health magazine stated his height was  ft  in .

schwarzeneggers autobiography, total recall, was released in october . he devotes one chapter called the secret to his extramarital affair. the majority of his book is about his successes in the three major chapters in his life bodybuilder, actor, and governor of california.

growing up during the allied occupation of austria, schwarzenegger commonly saw heavy military vehicles such as tanks as a child. as a result, he paid , to bring his austrian army m patton tank  to the united states, which he previously operated during his mandatory service in . however, he later obtained his vehicle in /, during his tenure as the chairmen of the presidents council on sports, fitness, and nutrition, and now uses it to support his charity. his first car ever was an opel kadett in  after serving in the austrian army, then he rode a harleydavidson fat boy in .moreover, he came to develop an interest in large vehicles and became the first civilian in the u.s. to purchase a humvee. he was so enamored by the vehicle that he lobbied the humvees manufacturer, am general, to produce a streetlegal, civilian version, which they did in ; the first two hummer hs they sold were also purchased by schwarzenegger. in , he had one regular and three running on nonfossil power sources; one for hydrogen, one for vegetable oil, and one for biodiesel. schwarzenegger was in the news in  for buying a rare bugatti veyron grand sport vitesse. he was spotted and filmed in  in his car, painted silver with bright aluminum forged wheels. his bugatti has its interior adorned in dark brown leather. in , schwarzenegger acquired a mercedes gclass modified for allelectric drive.the hummers that schwarzenegger bought in  are so largeeach weighs , lb  and is  feet  widethat they are classified as large trucks, and u.s. fuel economy regulations do not apply to them. during the gubernatorial recall campaign, he announced that he would convert one of his hummers to burn hydrogen. the conversion was reported to have cost about ,. after the election, he signed an executive order to jumpstart the building of hydrogen refueling plants called the california hydrogen highway network, and gained a u.s. department of energy grant to help pay for its projected us,, cost. california took delivery of the first hh  in october .

schwarzenegger has been involved with the special olympics for many years after they were founded by his exmotherinlaw eunice kennedy shriver. in , schwarzenegger was the official spokesperson for the special olympics held in shanghai, china. schwarzenegger believes that quality school opportunities should be made available to children who might not normally be able to access them. in , he founded the inner city games foundation  which provides cultural, educational and community enrichment programming to youth. icg is active in  cities around the country and serves over , children in over  schools countrywide. he has also been involved with afterschool allstars and founded the los angeles branch in . asas is an after school program provider, educating youth about health, fitness and nutrition.

on february , , schwarzenegger took part in the vancouver olympic torch relay. he handed off the flame to the next runner, sebastian coe.schwarzenegger had a collection of marxist busts, which he requested from russian friends during the dissolution of the soviet union, as they were being destroyed. in , he revealed that his wife had requested their removal, but he kept the one of vladimir lenin present, since he was the first. in , he said he kept the lenin bust to show losers.schwarzenegger is a supporter of israel, and has participated in a los angeles proisrael rally among other similar events. in , schwarzenegger visited israel to break ground on simon wiesenthal centers museum of tolerance jerusalem, and to lay a wreath at the yad vashem holocaust memorial, he also met with prime minister ariel sharon and president moshe katsav. in , at the independence day celebration hosted by the israeli consulate general in los angeles, schwarzenegger said i love israel. when i became governor, israel was the first country that i visited. when i had the chance to sign a bill calling on california pension funds to divest their money from companies that do business with iran, i immediately signed that bill, then he added, i knew that we could not send money to these crazy dictators who hate us and threaten israel any time they have a bad day.

schwarzenegger supported the  invasion of iraq. schwarzenegger also expressed support for the  military intervention in libya. in , schwarzenegger released a video message in support of the euromaidan protests against ukraines prorussian president viktor yanukovych. in , schwarzenegger released another video message condemning the russian invasion of ukraine. schwarzeneggers twitter account is one of the  accounts that the president of russias twitter account follows.schwarzenegger, who played football as a boy, grew up watching bayern munich and sturm graz. he also expressed his admiration of jrgen klopps liverpool in october .schwarzenegger inspired many actors to become action heroes, including dwayne johnson, matt mccolm, christian boeving, vidyut jamwal, and daniel greene. boevings character in the  action film when eagles strike was based on schwarzeneggers image from the late s mostly on major dutch schaefer from predator  and colonel john matrix from commando .

in , schwarzenegger helped to found the schwarzenegger institute for state and global policy, which is a part of the usc price school of public policy at the university of southern california. the institutes mission is to advance postpartisanship, where leaders put people over political parties and work together to find the best ideas and solutions to benefit the people they serve and to seek to influence public policy and public debate in finding solutions to the serious challenges we face. schwarzenegger serves as chairman of the institute.

at a  security conference, schwarzenegger called climate change the issue of our time. he also urged politicians to stop treating climate change as a political issue.

for the  republican party presidential primaries, schwarzenegger endorsed fellow republican john kasich. however, he announced in october that he would not vote for the republican presidential candidate donald trump in that years united states presidential election, with this being the first time he did not vote for the republican candidate since becoming a citizen in .

in recent years, schwarzenegger has been advocating for eating less meat, and he is an executive producer alongside james cameron et al. behind the documentary the game changers, that documents the explosive rise of plantbased eating in professional sports, in which he is also featured.

in , schwarzenegger condemned white supremacists who were seen carrying nazi and confederate flags by calling their heroes losers.in , while at the arnold classic africa sports competition as an official, schwarzenegger was attacked by an assailant in a flying kick. the assailant was arrested.following the january  united states capitol attack by supporters of president donald trump, schwarzenegger posted a video address on social media in which he likened the insurrection to nazi germanys kristallnacht, which he described as a night of rampage against the jews carried out by the nazi equivalent of the proud boys. he spoke of his fathers alcoholism, domestic violence, and abuse, and how it was typical of other former nazis and collaborators in the postwar era; and described trump as a failed leader. he will go down in history as the worst president ever.in late march , schwarzenegger was interviewed by politico about the upcoming recall election in california in which he said that its pretty much the same atmosphere today as it was then, and when he was asked about newsoms claim of this being a republican recall he responded that this recall effort is sparked by ordinary folks, and that this was not a power grab by republicans.schwarzenegger has spoken out about covid, urging americans to wear masks and practice social distancing. in august , he said there is a virus here. it kills people and the only way we prevent it is get vaccinated, wear masks, do social distancing, washing your hands all the time, and not just to think about, well my freedom is being kind of disturbed here. no, screw your freedom.in february , schwarzenegger said his diet has been mostly vegan for the past five years, saying it was about  plantbased food. he has been outspoken about the benefits of a vegan diet for health and said it had helped him feel healthier and younger overall. he also credited it to helping him lower his cholesterol.

bodybuilding

seventime mr. olympia winner

fourtime mr. universe winner

 world amateur bodybuilding championentertainment

 golden globe award winner

 inkpot award

 primetime emmy award winner for producing the documentary series years of living dangerouslyhalls of fame

international sports hall of fame 

wwe hall of fame 

medal for humanitary merit of the austrian albert schweitzer society 

star on the hollywood walk of famestate/local

public art mural portrait arnold schwarzenegger  by jonas never, venice, los angeles

schwarzenegger institute for state and global policy  named in his honor.

arnolds run ski trail at sun valley resort named in his honor. the trail is categorized as a black diamond, or most difficult, for its terrain.international

grand decoration of honour for services to the republic of austria in gold 

cavalier  and commander  of the french legion of honor

honorary ring of the federal state of styria 

a day for arnold on july , , in thal, austria. for his th birthday, the mayor sent schwarzenegger the enameled address sign  of the house where schwarzenegger was born, declaring this belongs to him. no one here will ever be assigned that number again.

honor et gloria white cross   ; ukrainian nonstate decoration bestowed by the vgo kraina  at the request of mr anatoliy ostapenko 

schwarzenegger, arnold . arnold developing a mr. universe physique. schwarzenegger. oclc .

schwarzenegger, arnold; douglas kent hall . arnold the education of a bodybuilder. new york simon  schuster. isbn .

schwarzenegger, arnold; douglas kent hall . arnolds bodyshaping for women. new york simon  schuster. isbn .

schwarzenegger, arnold; bill dobbins . arnolds bodybuilding for men. new york simon  schuster. isbn .

schwarzenegger, arnold; bill dobbins . the new encyclopedia of modern bodybuilding . new york simon  schuster. isbn .

schwarzenegger, arnold . total recall. new york simon  schuster. isbn .

schwarzenegger, arnold . be useful seven tools for life. london penguin books. isbn .

the united kingdom of great britain and northern ireland, commonly known as the united kingdom  or britain, is an island country in northwestern europe, off the northwestern coast of the continental mainland. it comprises four countries  england, scotland, wales, and northern ireland. it includes the island of great britain, the northeastern part of the island of ireland, and most of the smaller islands within the british isles. northern ireland shares a land border with the republic of ireland; otherwise, the united kingdom is surrounded by the atlantic ocean, the north sea, the english channel, the celtic sea and the irish sea. the total area of the united kingdom is , square miles , with an estimated  population of nearly  million people.

the united kingdom has evolved from a series of annexations, unions and separations of constituent countries over several hundred years. the treaty of union between the kingdom of england  and the kingdom of scotland in  resulted in their unification to become the kingdom of great britain. its union in  with the kingdom of ireland created the united kingdom of great britain and ireland. most of ireland seceded from the uk in , leaving the present united kingdom of great britain and northern ireland, which formally adopted its name in . the nearby isle of man, guernsey and jersey are not part of the uk, being crown dependencies, but the british government is responsible for their defence and international representation.the uk became the first industrialised country and was the worlds foremost power for the majority of the th and early th centuries, particularly during the pax britannica between  and . the british empire, at its height in the s, encompassed almost a quarter of the worlds landmass and population, and was the largest empire in history; however, its involvement in the first world war and the second world war damaged britains economic power and a global wave of decolonisation led to the independence of most british colonies. british influence can be observed in the legal and political systems of many of its former colonies, and the uks culture remains globally influential, particularly in literature, music and sport.

the united kingdom is a constitutional monarchy and parliamentary democracy. the capital and largest city of the united kingdom  is london. the cities of edinburgh, cardiff, and belfast are respectively the national capitals of scotland, wales, and northern ireland. other major cities include birmingham, manchester, glasgow, and leeds. the uk consists of three distinct legal jurisdictions england and wales, scotland, and northern ireland. this is due to these areas retaining their existing legal systems even after joining the uk. since , scotland, wales, and northern ireland also have their own devolved governments and legislatures, each with varying powers.the uk has the worlds sixthlargest economy by nominal gross domestic product , and the ninthlargest by purchasing power parity. it is a recognised nuclear state and is ranked fourth globally in military expenditure. the uk has been a permanent member of the un security council since its first session in . it is a member of the commonwealth of nations, the council of europe, the g, the oecd, nato, the five eyes, aukus and the cptpp.

in  ad, britannia referred to the roman province that encompassed modern england and wales. great britain encompassed the whole island, taking in the land north of the river forth known to the romans as caledonia in modern scotland . in the middle ages, the name britain was also applied to a small part of france now known as brittany. as a result, great britain  came into use to refer specifically to the island, with brittany often referred to as little britain. however, that name had no official significance until , when the islands kingdoms of england and scotland were united as the kingdom of great britain.the acts of union  declared that the kingdom of england and kingdom of scotland were united into one kingdom by the name of great britain. the term united kingdom has occasionally been used as a description for the former kingdom of great britain, although its official name from  to  was simply great britain. the acts of union  united the kingdoms of great britain and ireland in , forming the united kingdom of great britain and ireland. following the partition of ireland and the independence of the irish free state in , which left northern ireland as the only part of the island of ireland within the united kingdom, the name was changed in  to the united kingdom of great britain and northern ireland.although the united kingdom is a sovereign country, england, scotland, wales and northern ireland are also widely referred to as countries. the uk prime ministers website has used the phrase countries within a country to describe the united kingdom. some statistical summaries, such as those for the twelve nuts  regions refer to scotland, wales and northern ireland as regions. northern ireland is also referred to as a province. with regard to northern ireland, the descriptive name used can be controversial, with the choice often revealing ones political preferences.the term great britain conventionally refers to the island of great britain, or politically to england, scotland and wales in combination. it is sometimes used as a loose synonym for the united kingdom as a whole. the word england is occasionally used incorrectly to refer to the united kingdom as a whole, a mistake principally made by people from outside the uk.the term britain is used as a synonym for great britain, and the united kingdom. usage is mixed the uk government prefers to use the term uk rather than britain or british on its website , while acknowledging that both terms refer to the united kingdom and that elsewhere british government is used at least as frequently as united kingdom government. the uk permanent committee on geographical names recognises united kingdom, uk and u.k. as shortened and abbreviated geopolitical terms for the united kingdom of great britain and northern ireland in its toponymic guidelines; it does not list britain but notes that it is only the one specific nominal term great britain which invariably excludes northern ireland. the bbc historically preferred to use britain as shorthand only for great britain, though the present style guide does not take a position except that great britain excludes northern ireland.the adjective british is commonly used to refer to matters relating to the united kingdom and is used in law to refer to united kingdom citizenship and matters to do with nationality. people of the united kingdom use several different terms to describe their national identity and may identify themselves as being british, english, scottish, welsh, northern irish, or irish; or as having a combination of different national identities. the official designation for a citizen of the united kingdom is british citizen.

settlement by cromagnons of what was to become the united kingdom occurred in waves beginning by about , years ago. by the end of the regions prehistoric period, the population is thought to have belonged largely to a culture termed insular celtic, comprising brittonic britain and gaelic ireland.

the roman conquest, beginning in  ad, and the year rule of southern britain, was followed by an invasion by germanic anglosaxon settlers, reducing the brittonic area mainly to what was to become wales, cornwall and, until the latter stages of the anglosaxon settlement, the hen ogledd . most of the region settled by the anglosaxons became unified as the kingdom of england in the th century. meanwhile, gaelicspeakers in northwest britain  united with the picts to create the kingdom of scotland in the th century.

in , the normans invaded england from northern france. after conquering england, they seized large parts of wales, conquered much of ireland and were invited to settle in scotland, bringing to each country feudalism on the northern french model and normanfrench culture. the anglonorman ruling class greatly influenced, but eventually assimilated with, the local cultures. subsequent medieval english kings completed the conquest of wales and tried unsuccessfully to annex scotland. asserting its independence in the  declaration of arbroath, scotland maintained its independence thereafter, albeit in nearconstant conflict with england.

the english monarchs, through inheritance of substantial territories in france and claims to the french crown, were also heavily involved in conflicts in france, most notably the hundred years war, while the kings of scots were in an alliance with the french during this period.early modern britain saw religious conflict resulting from the reformation and the introduction of protestant state churches in each country. the english reformation ushered in political, constitutional, social and cultural change in the th century and established the church of england. moreover, it defined a national identity for england and slowly, but profoundly, changed peoples religious beliefs. wales was fully incorporated into the kingdom of england, and ireland was constituted as a kingdom in personal union with the english crown. in what was to become northern ireland, the lands of the independent catholic gaelic nobility were confiscated and given to protestant settlers from england and scotland.in , the kingdoms of england, scotland and ireland were united in a personal union when james vi, king of scots, inherited the crowns of england and ireland and moved his court from edinburgh to london; each country nevertheless remained a separate political entity and retained its separate political, legal, and religious institutions.in the midth century, all three kingdoms were involved in a series of connected wars  which led to the temporary overthrow of the monarchy, with the execution of king charles i, and the establishment of the shortlived unitary republic of the commonwealth of england, scotland and ireland.although the monarchy was restored, the interregnum along with the glorious revolution of  and the subsequent bill of rights  in england and claim of right act  in scotland ensured that, unlike much of the rest of europe, royal absolutism would not prevail, and a professed catholic could never accede to the throne. the british constitution would develop on the basis of constitutional monarchy and the parliamentary system. with the founding of the royal society in , science was greatly encouraged. during this period, particularly in england, the development of naval power and the interest in voyages of discovery led to the acquisition and settlement of overseas colonies, particularly in north america and the caribbean.though previous attempts at uniting the two kingdoms within great britain in , , and  had proved unsuccessful, the attempt initiated in  led to the treaty of union of  being agreed and ratified by both parliaments.

on  may , the kingdom of great britain was formed, the result of the acts of union .in the th century, cabinet government developed under robert walpole, in practice the first prime minister . a series of jacobite uprisings sought to remove the protestant house of hanover from the throne and restore the catholic house of stuart. the jacobites were finally defeated at the battle of culloden in , after which the scottish highlanders were forcibly assimilated into scotland by revoking the feudal independence of clan chiefs. the british colonies in north america that broke away in the american war of independence became the united states, recognised by britain in . british imperial ambition turned towards asia, particularly to india.britain played a leading part in the atlantic slave trade, mainly between  and  when british or britishcolonial slave ships transported nearly . million slaves from africa. the slaves were taken to work on plantations, principally in the caribbean but also north america. slavery coupled with the caribbean sugar industry had a significant role in strengthening the british economy in the th century. however, with pressure from the abolitionism movement, parliament banned the trade in , banned slavery in the british empire in , and britain took a role in the movement to abolish slavery worldwide through the blockade of africa and pressing other nations to end their trade with a series of treaties.

in  the parliaments of great britain and ireland each passed an act of union, uniting the two kingdoms and creating the united kingdom of great britain and ireland.

after the defeat of france at the end of the french revolutionary wars and napoleonic wars , the united kingdom emerged as the principal naval and imperial power . unchallenged at sea, british dominance was later described as pax britannica , a period of relative peace among the great powers  during which the british empire became the global hegemon and adopted the role of global policeman. by the time of the great exhibition of , britain was described as the workshop of the world. from  to , britain took part in the crimean war, allied with the ottoman empire against tsarist russia, participating in the naval battles of the baltic sea known as the land war in the gulf of bothnia and the gulf of finland, among others. following the indian rebellion in , the british government led by lord palmerston assumed direct rule over india. alongside the formal control it exerted over its own colonies, british dominance of much of world trade meant that it effectively controlled the economies of regions such as east asia and latin america.

throughout the victorian era, political attitudes favoured free trade and laissezfaire policies, as well as a gradual widening of the voting franchise, with the  reform act championed by william gladstone granting suffrage to a majority of males for the first time. the british population increased at a dramatic rate, accompanied by rapid urbanisation, causing significant social and economic stresses. by the late th century, the conservatives under benjamin disraeli and lord salisbury initiated a period of imperial expansion in africa, maintained a policy of splendid isolation in europe, and attempted to contain russian influence in afghanistan and persia, in what came to be known as the great game. during this time, canada, australia and new zealand were granted selfgoverning dominion status. at the turn of the century, britains industrial dominance became challenged by the german empire and the united states. the edwardian era saw social reform and home rule for ireland become important domestic issues, while the labour party emerged from an alliance of trade unions and small socialist groups in , and suffragettes campaigned for womens right to vote.

britain was one of the principal allies that defeated the central powers in the first world war . alongside their french, russian and  american counterparts, british armed forces were engaged across much of the british empire and in several regions of europe, particularly on the western front. the high fatalities of trench warfare caused the loss of much of a generation of men, with lasting social effects in the nation and a great disruption in the social order. britain had suffered . million casualties and finished the war with a huge national debt. the consequences of the war persuaded the government to expand the right to vote in national and local elections with the representation of the people act . after the war, britain became a permanent member of the executive council of the league of nations and received a mandate over a number of former german and ottoman colonies. under the leadership of david lloyd george, the british empire reached its greatest extent, covering a fifth of the worlds land surface and a quarter of its population.by the mids, most of the british population could listen to bbc radio programmes. experimental television broadcasts began in  and the first scheduled bbc television service commenced in . the rise of irish nationalism, and disputes within ireland over the terms of irish home rule, led eventually to the partition of the island in . the irish free state became independent, initially with dominion status in , and unambiguously independent in . northern ireland remained part of the united kingdom. the  equal franchise act gave women electoral equality with men in national elections. strikes in the mids culminated in the general strike of , which ended in a victory for the government led by stanley baldwin. britain had still not recovered from the effects of the first world war when the great depression  led to considerable unemployment and hardship in the old industrial areas, as well as political and social unrest with rising membership in communist and socialist parties. a coalition government was formed in .

nonetheless, britain was a very wealthy country, formidable in arms, ruthless in pursuit of its interests and sitting at the heart of a global production system. after nazi germany invaded poland in , britain entered the second world war. winston churchill became prime minister and head of a coalition government in . despite the defeat of its european allies in the first year, britain and its empire continued the war against germany. churchill engaged industry, scientists and engineers to support the government and the military in the prosecution of the war effort.in , the royal air force defeated the german luftwaffe in the battle of britain. urban areas suffered heavy bombing during the blitz. the grand alliance of britain, the united states and the soviet union formed in , leading the allies against the axis powers. there were eventual hardfought victories in the battle of the atlantic, the north africa campaign and the italian campaign. british forces played important roles in the normandy landings of  and the liberation of europe. the british army led the burma campaign against japan, and the british pacific fleet fought japan at sea. british scientists contributed to the manhattan project whose task was to build an atomic weapon. once built, it was decided, with british consent, to use the weapon against japan.

the uk was one of the big three powers  who met to plan the postwar world; it was an original signatory to the declaration by united nations and became one of the five permanent members of the united nations security council. it worked closely with the united states to establish the imf, world bank and nato. the war left the uk severely weakened and financially dependent on the marshall plan, but it was spared the total war that devastated eastern europe.in the immediate postwar years, the labour government under clement attlee initiated a radical programme of reforms, which significantly impacted british society in the following decades. major industries and public utilities were nationalised, a welfare state was established, and a comprehensive, publicly funded healthcare system, the national health service, was created. the rise of nationalism in the colonies coincided with britains muchdiminished economic position, so that a policy of decolonisation was unavoidable. independence was granted to india and pakistan in . over the next three decades, most colonies of the british empire gained their independence, and many became members of the commonwealth of nations.

the uk was the third country to develop a nuclear weapons arsenal , but the postwar limits of britains international role were illustrated by the suez crisis of . the international spread of the english language ensured the continuing international influence of its literature and culture. as a result of a shortage of workers in the s, the government encouraged immigration from commonwealth countries. in the following decades, the uk became a more multiethnic society. despite rising living standards in the late s and s, the uks economic performance was less successful than many of its main competitors such as france, west germany and japan.

in the decadeslong process of european integration, the uk was a founding member of the western european union, established with the london and paris conferences in . in  the uk was one of the seven founding members of the european free trade association , but in  it left to join the european communities . in a  referendum  voted to stay in it. when the ec became the european union  in , the uk was one of the  founding member states.

from the late s, northern ireland suffered communal and paramilitary violence  conventionally known as the troubles. it is usually considered to have ended with the  belfast good friday agreement.

following a period of widespread economic slowdown and industrial strife in the s, the conservative government of the s led by margaret thatcher initiated a radical policy of monetarism, deregulation, particularly of the financial sector  and labour markets, the sale of stateowned companies , and the withdrawal of subsidies to others.in , argentina invaded the british territories of south georgia and the falkland islands, leading to the week falklands war in which argentine forces were defeated. the inhabitants of the islands are predominantly descendants of british settlers, and strongly favour british sovereignty, expressed in a  referendum. from , the uk economy was helped by the inflow of substantial north sea oil revenues.around the end of the th century, there were major changes to the governance of the uk with the establishment of devolved administrations for scotland, wales and northern ireland. the statutory incorporation followed acceptance of the european convention on human rights. the uk remained a great power with global diplomatic and military influence and a leading role in the united nations and nato.

the uk broadly supported the united states approach to the war on terror in the early st century. british troops fought in the war in afghanistan, but controversy surrounded britains military deployment in iraq, which saw the largest protest in british history demonstrating in opposition to the government led by tony blair.the  global financial crisis severely affected the uk economy. the cameronclegg coalition government of  introduced austerity measures intended to tackle the substantial public deficits. studies have suggested that policy led to significant social disruption and suffering. a referendum on scottish independence in  resulted in the scottish electorate voting by . to . to remain part of the united kingdom.in , . per cent of voters in the united kingdom voted to leave the european union. the uk left the eu in . on  may  the euuk trade and cooperation agreement came into force.the covid pandemic had a severe impact on the uks economy, caused major disruptions to education and had farreaching impacts on society and politics in  and . the united kingdom was the first country in the world to use an approved covid vaccine, developing its own vaccine through a collaboration between oxford university and astrazeneca, which allowed the uks vaccine rollout to be among the fastest in the world.on  september , elizabeth ii, the longestliving and longestreigning british monarch, died at the age of . upon the queens death, her eldest child charles, prince of wales, acceded to the british throne as charles iii.

the total area of the united kingdom is approximately , square kilometres . the country occupies the major part of the british isles archipelago and includes the island of great britain, the northeastern onesixth of the island of ireland and some smaller surrounding islands. it lies between the north atlantic ocean and the north sea with the southeast coast coming within  miles  of the coast of northern france, from which it is separated by the english channel.the royal greenwich observatory in london was chosen as the defining point of the prime meridian at the international meridian conference in .the united kingdom lies between latitudes  and  n, and longitudes  w and  e. northern ireland shares a mile  land boundary with the republic of ireland. the coastline of great britain is , miles  long. it is connected to continental europe by the channel tunnel, which at  miles   is the longest underwater tunnel in the world.the uk contains four terrestrial ecoregions celtic broadleaf forests, english lowlands beech forests, north atlantic moist mixed forests, and caledon conifer forests. the area of woodland in the uk in  is estimated to be . million hectares, which represents  of the total land area in the uk.

most of the united kingdom has a temperate climate, with generally cool temperatures and plentiful rainfall all year round. the temperature varies with the seasons seldom dropping below  c  or rising above  c . some parts, away from the coast, of upland england, wales, northern ireland and most of scotland, experience a subpolar oceanic climate . higher elevations in scotland experience a continental subarctic climate  and the mountains experience a tundra climate .the prevailing wind is from the southwest and bears frequent spells of mild and wet weather from the atlantic ocean, although the eastern parts are mostly sheltered from this wind. since the majority of the rain falls over the western regions, the eastern parts are the driest. atlantic currents, warmed by the gulf stream, bring mild winters, especially in the west where winters are wet and even more so over high ground. summers are warmest in the southeast of england and coolest in the north. heavy snowfall can occur in winter and early spring on high ground, and occasionally settles to great depth away from the hills.the average total annual sunshine in the united kingdom is . hours, which is just under  of the maximum possible. the hours of sunshine vary from  to about  hours per year, and since  the uk has been and still is receiving above the  to  average hours of sunshine.as of , the united kingdom is ranked nd out of  countries in the environmental performance index. a law has been passed that uk greenhouse gas emissions will be net zero by .

england accounts for  per cent of the uk, covering , square miles . most of the country consists of lowland terrain, with upland and mountainous terrain northwest of the teesexe line which roughly divides the uk into lowland and upland areas. lowland areas include cornwall, the new forest, the south downs and the norfolk broads. upland areas include the lake district, the pennines, the yorkshire dales, exmoor, and dartmoor. the main rivers and estuaries are the thames, severn, and the humber. englands highest mountain is scafell pike, at  metres  in the lake district; its largest island is the isle of wight.

scotland accounts for  per cent of the uk, covering , square miles . this includes nearly  islands, notably the hebrides, orkney islands and shetland islands. scotland is the most mountainous constituent country of the uk, the highlands to the north and west are the more rugged region containing the majority of scotlands mountainous land, including the cairngorms, loch lomond and the trossachs and ben nevis which at , metres  is the highest point in the british isles.wales accounts for less than  per cent of the uk, covering , square miles . wales is mostly mountainous, though south wales is less mountainous than north and mid wales. the highest mountains in wales are in snowdonia and include snowdon  which, at , metres , is the highest peak in wales. wales has over , miles  of coastline including the pembrokeshire coast. several islands lie off the welsh mainland, the largest of which is anglesey .

northern ireland, separated from great britain by the irish sea and north channel, has an area of , square miles  and is mostly hilly. it includes lough neagh which, at  square miles , is the largest lake in the british isles by area, lough erne which has over  islands and the giants causeway which is a world heritage site. the highest peak in northern ireland is slieve donard in the mourne mountains at  metres .

the uk is a constitutional monarchy and a parliamentary democracy operating under the westminster system, otherwise known as a democratic parliamentary monarchy. it is a centralised, unitary state wherein the parliament of the united kingdom is sovereign. parliament is made up of the elected house of commons, the appointed house of lords and the crown . the main business of parliament takes place in the two houses, but royal assent is required for a bill to become an act of parliament . as a result of parliamentary sovereignty, the british constitution is uncodified, consisting mostly of disparate written sources, including parliamentary statutes, judgemade case law and international treaties, together with constitutional conventions. nevertheless, the supreme court recognises a number of principles underlying the british constitution, such as parliamentary sovereignty, the rule of law, democracy, and upholding international law.king charles iii is the current monarch and head of state of the uk and of  other independent countries. these  countries are today referred to as commonwealth realms. the monarch is formally vested with all executive authority as the personal embodiment of the crown and is ...fundamental to the law and working of government in the uk. the disposition of such powers however, including those belonging to the royal prerogative, is generally exercised only on the advice of ministers of the crown responsible to parliament and thence to the electorate. nevertheless, in the performance of official duties, the monarch has the right to be consulted, the right to encourage, and the right to warn. in addition, the monarch has a number of reserve powers at his disposal, albeit rarely used, to uphold responsible government and prevent constitutional crises.

for general elections , the uk is currently divided into  constituencies, each of which is represented by one member of parliament  elected by the firstpastthepost system. mps hold office for up to five years and must then stand for reelection if they wish to continue to be an mp. the conservative party, colloquially known as the tory party or the tories, and the labour party have been the dominant political parties in the uk since the s, leading to the uk being described as a twoparty system. however, since the s other political parties have won seats in the house of commons, although never more than the conservatives or labour.the prime minister is the head of government in the uk. acting under the direction and supervision of a cabinet of senior ministers selected and led by the prime minister, the government serves as the principal instrument for public policymaking, administers public services and, through the privy council, promulgates statutory instruments and tenders advice to the monarch.

nearly all prime ministers have served concurrently as first lord of the treasury and all prime ministers have continuously served as first lord of the treasury since , minister for the civil service since , and minister for the union since . while appointed by the monarch, in modern times the prime minister is, by convention, an mp, the leader of the political party with the most seats in the house of commons, and holds office by virtue of their ability to command the confidence of the house of commons. the current prime minister, as of october , is rishi sunak mp, leader of the conservative party.

the geographical division of the united kingdom into counties or shires began in england and scotland in the early middle ages, and was completed throughout great britain and ireland by the early modern period. modern local government by elected councils, partly based on the ancient counties, was established by separate acts of parliament in england and wales in , scotland in  and ireland in , meaning there is no consistent system of administrative or geographic demarcation across the uk.

until the th century there was little change to those arrangements, but there has since been a constant evolution of role and function.local government in england is complex, with the distribution of functions varying according to local arrangements. the uppertier subdivisions of england are the nine regions, now used primarily for statistical purposes. one of the regions, greater london, has had a directly elected assembly and mayor since  following popular support for the proposal in a  referendum.local government in scotland is divided into  council areas with a wide variation in size and population. the cities of glasgow, edinburgh, aberdeen and dundee are separate council areas, as is the highland council, which includes a third of scotlands area but only just over , people. local councils are made up of elected councillors, of whom there are ,.local government in wales consists of  unitary authorities, each led by a leader and cabinet elected by the council itself. these include the cities of cardiff, swansea and newport, which are unitary authorities in their own right. elections are held every four years under the firstpastthepost system.local government in northern ireland since , has been organised into  district councils, each elected by single transferable vote. their powers are limited to services such as waste collection, dog control, and maintaining parks and cemeteries. in  the executive agreed on proposals to create  new councils and replace the present system.

since , scotland has had a devolved national government and legislature called the scottish parliament. the scottish government and parliament have wideranging powers over any matter that has not been specifically reserved to the uk parliament, including education, healthcare, scots law and local government. their power over economic issues is significantly constrained by an act of the uk parliament passed in . the current scottish government is a scottish national party and scottish greens coalition, led by first minister humza yousaf, leader of the scottish national party. in , the scottish independence referendum was held, with . voting against independence from the united kingdom and . voting in favour, resulting in scotland staying within the united kingdom. local government in scotland is divided into  council areas with a wide variation in size and population. local councils are made up of elected councillors, of whom there are ,.

since , wales has a devolved national government and legislature, known as the senedd. elections to the senedd use the additional member system. they have more limited powers than those devolved to scotland. the senedd is able to legislate on any matter not specifically reserved to the uk parliament through acts of senedd cymru. the current welsh government is labour, led by first minister mark drakeford, who has been the first minister since . local government in wales consists of  unitary authorities, each led by a leader and cabinet elected by the council itself.

since , northern ireland has a devolved government, the executive, and legislature, the assembly. elections to the assembly use the single transferable vote system. the executive and assembly have powers similar to those devolved to scotland. the executive is led by a diarchy representing unionist and nationalist members of the assembly. the island of ireland has a turbulent and violent modern political history, a period referred to as the troubles. the  good friday agreement acts as a de facto constitution for northern ireland. local government in northern ireland since  has been divided between  councils with limited responsibilities.

the uk does not have a codified constitution and constitutional matters are not among the powers devolved to scotland, wales or northern ireland. under the doctrine of parliamentary sovereignty, the uk parliament could, in theory, therefore, abolish the scottish parliament, senedd or northern ireland assembly. in practice, it would be politically difficult for the uk parliament to abolish devolution to the scottish parliament and the senedd, because these institutions were created by referendum decisions. the political constraints placed upon the uk parliaments power to interfere with devolution in northern ireland are greater still, because devolution in northern ireland rests upon an international agreement with the government of ireland. the uk parliament restricts the three devolved parliaments legislative competence in economic areas through an act passed in .

the uk is a permanent member of the united nations security council, a member of nato, aukus, the commonwealth of nations, the g finance ministers, the g forum, the g, the oecd, the wto, the council of europe and the osce. the uk has the british council which is a british organisation based in over  countries specialising in international cultural and educational opportunities. the uk is said to have a special relationship with the united states and a close partnership with france  the entente cordiale  and shares nuclear weapons technology with both countries; the angloportuguese alliance is considered to be the oldest binding military alliance in the world. the uk is also closely linked with the republic of ireland; the two countries share a common travel area and cooperate through the britishirish intergovernmental conference and the britishirish council. britains global presence and influence is further amplified through its trading relations, foreign investments, official development assistance and military engagements. canada, australia and new zealand, all of which are former colonies of the british empire which share king charles as their head of state, are the most favourably viewed countries in the world by british people.

the united kingdom, the  british overseas territories and the three crown dependencies form one undivided realm. all parts of the realm are under the sovereignty of the british crown, but the territories and dependencies are not part of the uk. this is distinct from the status of commonwealth realms, who have separate monarchies, but share the same monarch.

the  british overseas territories are remnants of the british empire anguilla; bermuda; the british antarctic territory; the british indian ocean territory; the british virgin islands; the cayman islands; the falkland islands; gibraltar; montserrat; saint helena, ascension and tristan da cunha; the turks and caicos islands; the pitcairn islands; south georgia and the south sandwich islands; and akrotiri and dhekelia on the island of cyprus. british claims in antarctica have limited international recognition. collectively britains overseas territories encompass an approximate land area of , square nautical miles , with a total population of approximately ,. the overseas territories also give the uk the worlds fifth largest exclusive economic zone at ,, km .the crown dependencies are possessions of the crown, as opposed to territories of the uk. they comprise three independently administered jurisdictions the bailiwicks of jersey and of guernsey in the english channel, and the isle of man in the irish sea. by mutual agreement, the british government manages the islands foreign affairs and defence and the uk parliament has the authority to legislate on their behalf. internationally, they are regarded as territories for which the united kingdom is responsible. the power to pass legislation affecting the islands ultimately rests with their own respective legislative assemblies, with the assent of the crown . since , each crown dependency has had a chief minister as its head of government.

the united kingdom does not have a single legal system as article  of the  treaty of union provided for the continuation of scotlands separate legal system. today the uk has three distinct systems of law english law, northern ireland law and scots law. a new supreme court of the united kingdom came into being in october  to replace the appellate committee of the house of lords. the judicial committee of the privy council, including the same members as the supreme court, is the highest court of appeal for several independent commonwealth countries, the british overseas territories and the crown dependencies.both english law, which applies in england and wales, and northern ireland law are based on commonlaw principles. the courts of england and wales are headed by the senior courts of england and wales, consisting of the court of appeal, the high court of justice  and the crown court . scots law is a hybrid system based on commonlaw and civillaw principles. the chief courts are the court of session, for civil cases, and the high court of justiciary, for criminal cases. the supreme court of the united kingdom serves as the highest court of appeal for civil cases under scots law.crime in england and wales increased in the period between  and , though since that peak there has been an overall fall of  per cent in recorded crime from  to , according to crime statistics. the prison population of england and wales has increased to ,, giving england and wales the highest rate of incarceration in western europe at  per ,.samesex marriage has been legal in england, scotland, and wales since , and in northern ireland since . lgbt equality in the united kingdom is considered advanced by modern standards.

his majestys armed forces consist of three professional service branches the royal navy and royal marines , the british army and the royal air force. the armed forces of the united kingdom are managed by the ministry of defence and controlled by the defence council, chaired by the secretary of state for defence. the commanderinchief is the british monarch, to whom members of the forces swear an oath of allegiance. the armed forces are charged with protecting the uk and its overseas territories, promoting the uks global security interests and supporting international peacekeeping efforts. they are active and regular participants in nato, including the allied rapid reaction corps, the five power defence arrangements, rimpac and other worldwide coalition operations. overseas garrisons and facilities are maintained in ascension island, bahrain, belize, brunei, canada, cyprus, diego garcia, the falkland islands, germany, gibraltar, kenya, oman, qatar and singapore.according to sources which include the stockholm international peace research institute and the international institute for strategic studies, the uk has either the fourth or the fifthhighest military expenditure. total defence spending amounts to . per cent of national gdp. following the end of the cold war, defence policy has a stated assumption that the most demanding operations will be undertaken as part of a coalition.

the uk has a partially regulated market economy. based on market exchange rates, the uk is the sixthlargest economy in the world and the secondlargest in europe by nominal gdp.

the united kingdom uses the pound sterling, currently the fourth mosttraded currency in the foreign exchange market and the worlds fourthlargest reserve currency . the pound sterling was the best performing currency in the first quarter of , gaining .pc against the dollar, ahead of all other g economies. london is the world capital for foreign exchange trading, with a global market share of . in  of the daily . trillion global turnover. hm treasury, led by the chancellor of the exchequer, is responsible for developing and executing the governments public finance policy and economic policy. the bank of england is the uks central bank and is responsible for issuing notes and coins in the pound sterling. banks in scotland and northern ireland retain the right to issue their own notes, subject to retaining enough bank of england notes in reserve to cover their issue.

the service sector made up around  of the uks gva in . as of , the uk is the worlds secondlargest exporter of services. london is one of the worlds largest financial centres, ranking second in the world in the global financial centres index in . london also has the largest city gdp in europe. edinburgh ranks th in the world, and sixth in western europe in the global financial centres index in . tourism is very important to the british economy; london was named as europes most popular destination for . the creative industries accounted for . of the uks gva in , having grown by . in real terms from . creative industries contributed more than bn to the uk economy in , growth in the sector is more than five times larger than growth across the uk economy as a whole as reported in . lloyds of london is the worlds largest insurance and reinsurance market and is located in london. wpp plc, the worlds biggest advertising company, is also based in the uk.

the automotive industry employs around , people, with a turnover in  of  billion, generating  billion of exports . in , the uk produced around , passenger vehicles and , commercial vehicles, including luxury cars such as rollsroyce, bentley and range rover. the uk is a major centre for engine manufacturing in  around . million engines were produced. it is also the worlds fourthlargest exporter of engines, as of . the uk motorsport industry employs more than , people, comprises around , companies and has an annual turnover of around  billion.  of the  formula one teams are based in the uk, with their technology being used in supercars and hypercars from mclaren, aston martin and lotus.

the aerospace industry of the uk is the second largest national aerospace industry in the world depending upon the method of measurement and has an annual turnover of around  billion. the uk space industry was worth .bn in / and employed , people. since , the number of space organisations has grown on average nearly  per year, with , organisations reported in . the uk space agency has stated in  that it is investing . billion in space related projects.the agriculture industry is intensive, highly mechanised and efficient by european standards, producing about  per cent of food needs with less than . per cent of the labour force . around twothirds of production is devoted to livestock, onethird to arable crops. the uk retains a significant, though much reduced fishing industry. it is also rich in a variety of natural resources including coal, petroleum, natural gas, tin, limestone, iron ore, salt, clay, chalk, gypsum, lead, silica and an abundance of arable land.the united kingdom has among the highest levels of income inequality in europe and the oecd, and is one of the most regionally unequal highincome countries in the world.

england and scotland were leading centres of the scientific revolution from the th century. the united kingdom led the industrial revolution from the th century, and has continued to produce scientists and engineers credited with important advances. major theorists from the th and th centuries include isaac newton, whose laws of motion and illumination of gravity have been seen as a keystone of modern science; from the th century charles darwin, whose theory of evolution by natural selection was fundamental to the development of modern biology, and james clerk maxwell, who formulated classical electromagnetic theory; and more recently stephen hawking, who advanced major theories in the fields of cosmology, quantum gravity and the investigation of black holes.the department for science, innovation and technology  is responsible for helping to encourage, develop and manage the uks scientific, research, and technological outputs. scientific research and development remains important in british universities, with many establishing science parks to facilitate production and cooperation with industry. in  the uk retained its number one spot for technology in europe reaching a combined market value of  trillion. cambridge was named the number one university in the world for producing successful technology founders.the uk was ranked fourth in the global innovation index , , , and , which is based on around  indicators, including measures of the political environment, education, infrastructure and knowledge creation. during , the uk produced . per cent of the worlds scientific research papers and had a . per cent share of scientific citations, the third highest in the world . the uk ranked st in the world for fieldweighted citation impact. scientific journals produced in the uk include publications by the royal society, nature, the british medical journal and the lancet.

a radial road network totals , miles  of main roads, , miles  of motorways and , miles  of paved roads. the m, encircling london, is the largest and busiest bypass in the world. in , there were a total of . million licensed vehicles in great britain.the uk has an extensive railway network of , miles . in great britain, the british rail network was privatised between  and , followed by a rapid rise in passenger numbers. the uk was ranked eighth among national european rail systems in the  european railway performance index assessing intensity of use, quality of service and safety. high speed   is a new high speed railway under construction linking up london, the midlands, the north and scotland, serving over  stations, including eight of britains  largest cities and connecting around  million people, capable of speeds of up to  mph. crossrail, which was renamed the elizabeth line in , in honour of queen elizabeth ii, opened in . it was europes largest construction project at the time and will bring in an estimated  billion to the uk economy.

great british railways is a planned stateowned public body that will oversee rail transport in great britain. in , there were . billion bus journeys in the uk, . billion of which were in london. the red doubledecker bus has entered popular culture as an internationally recognised icon of england. the london bus network is extensive, with over , scheduled services every weekday carrying about six million passengers on over  different routes making it one of the most extensive bus systems in the world and the largest in europe.in the year from october  to september , uk airports handled a total of . million passengers. in that period the three largest airports were london heathrow airport , gatwick airport  and london stansted airport . london heathrow airport, located  miles  west of the capital, is the worlds second busiest airport by international passenger traffic and has the most international passenger traffic of any airport in the world; it is the hub for the uk flag carrier british airways, as well as virgin atlantic.

in , the uk was the worlds thlargest consumer of energy and the ndlargest producer. the uk is home to many large energy companies, including two of the six major oil and gas companies  bp and shell.the total of all renewable electricity sources provided  of the electricity generated in the uk in . the uk is one of the best sites in europe for wind energy, and wind power production is the countrys fastestgrowing supply; in , . of the uks total electricity was generated by wind power. the uk has the largest offshore wind farm in the world, which is located off the coast of yorkshire.in , the uk had  nuclear reactors normally generating about  per cent of the uks electricity. unlike germany and japan, there are two reactors under construction and more planned. in the late s, nuclear power plants contributed around  per cent of the total annual electricity generation in the uk, but this has gradually declined as old plants have been shut down. the uk government is investing in small modular reactors and advanced modular reactors research and development.

in , the uk produced  thousand barrels per day  of oil  and consumed , thousand bbl/d. production is now in decline and the uk has been a net importer of oil since . in , the uk had around  billion barrels of proven crude oil reserves.in , the uk was the stlargest producer of natural gas in the world. production is now in decline and the uk has been a net importer of natural gas since . in , the uk produced . million tonnes of coal falling  in  years. in  it had proven recoverable coal reserves of  million tonnes. the uk coal authority has stated that there is a potential to produce between  billion tonnes and  billion tonnes of coal through underground coal gasification  or fracking, and based on current uk coal consumption, such reserves could last between  and  years.

access to improved water supply and sanitation in the uk is universal. it is estimated that  per cent of households are connected to the sewer network. according to the environment agency, total water abstraction for public water supply in the uk was , megalitres per day in .in england and wales water and sewerage services are provided by  private regional water and sewerage companies and  mostly smaller private water only companies. in scotland, water and sewerage services are provided by a single public company, scottish water. in northern ireland water and sewerage services are also provided by a single public entity, northern ireland water.

in the  census the total population of the united kingdom was ,,. it is the fourthlargest in europe , the fifthlargest in the commonwealth and the ndlargest in the world. in mid and mid net longterm international migration contributed more to population growth. in mid and mid natural change contributed the most to population growth. between  and  the population increased by an average annual rate of approximately . per cent. the  census also showed that, over the previous  years, the proportion of the population aged  fell from  per cent to  per cent, and the proportion of people aged  and over rose from  to  per cent. in  the median age of the uk population was . years.englands population in  was  million, representing some  per cent of the uk total. it is one of the most densely populated countries in the world, with  people per square kilometre in mid, with a particular concentration in london and the southeast. the  census put scotlands population at . million, wales at . million and northern ireland at . million.in  the average total fertility rate  across the uk was . children born per woman. while a rising birth rate is contributing to population growth, it remains considerably below the baby boom peak of . children per woman in , or the high of . children born per woman in , below the replacement rate of ., but higher than the  record low of .. in , . per cent of births in the uk were to unmarried women. the office for national statistics reported in  that out of the uk population aged  and over, . per cent identify as gay, lesbian, or bisexual ; . per cent of respondents responded with other, i dont know, or did not respond. the number of transgender people in the uk was estimated to be between , and , by research between  and .

historically, indigenous british people were thought to be descended from the various ethnic groups that settled there before the th century the celts, romans, anglosaxons, norse and the normans. welsh people could be the oldest ethnic group in the uk. the uk has a history of nonwhite immigration with liverpool having the oldest black population in the country dating back to at least the s during the period of the african slave trade. during this period it is estimated the afrocaribbean population of great britain was , to , which later declined due to the abolition of slavery. the uk also has the oldest chinese community in europe, dating to the arrival of chinese seamen in the th century. in , . per cent of the uk population identified themselves as white, meaning . per cent of the uk population identify themselves as of one of an ethnic minority group.ethnic diversity varies significantly across the uk. . per cent of londons population and . per cent of leicesters was estimated to be nonwhite in , whereas less than  per cent of the populations of north east england, wales and the south west were from ethnic minorities, according to the  census. in , . per cent of primary and . per cent of secondary pupils at state schools in england were members of an ethnic minority.

the english language is the official and most spoken language of the united kingdom that originated from england. the united kingdom proactively promotes the language globally to build connections, understanding and trust between people in the uk and countries worldwide. it is estimated that  per cent of the uks population are monolingual english speakers. . per cent of the population are estimated to speak languages brought to the uk as a result of relatively recent immigration. south asian languages are the largest grouping which includes punjabi, urdu, bengali, sylheti, hindi and gujarati. according to the  census, polish has become the secondlargest language spoken in england and has , speakers. in , some threequarters of a million people spoke little or no english.

three indigenous celtic languages are spoken in the uk welsh, irish and scottish gaelic. cornish, which became extinct as a first language in the late th century, is subject to revival efforts and has a small group of second language speakers. according to the  census, the welshspeaking population of wales aged three or older was , people . in addition, it is estimated that about , welsh speakers live in england. in the  census in northern ireland , people  stated that they had some knowledge of irish , almost exclusively in the nationalist  population. over , people in scotland  had some gaelic language ability, including  per cent of those living in the outer hebrides. the number of children being taught either welsh or scottish gaelic is increasing. scots, a language descended from early northern middle english, has limited recognition alongside its regional variant, ulster scots in northern ireland, without specific commitments to protection and promotion. as of april , there are said to be around , users of british sign language , a sign language used by deaf people, in the uk.

forms of christianity have dominated religious life in what is now the united kingdom for more than , years. although a majority of citizens still identify with christianity in many surveys, regular church attendance has fallen dramatically since the middle of the th century, while immigration and demographic change have contributed to the growth of other faiths, most notably islam. this has led some commentators to variously describe the uk as a multifaith, secularised, or postchristian society.in the  census, . per cent of all respondents indicated that they were christians, with the next largest faiths being islam , hinduism , sikhism , judaism , buddhism  and all other religions . of the respondents,  per cent stated that they had no religion and a further  per cent did not state a religious preference. a tearfund survey in  showed that only one in ten britons actually attend church weekly. between the  and  census, there was a  per cent decrease in the number of people who identified as christian, while the percentage of those reporting no religious affiliation doubled. this contrasted with growth in the other main religious group categories, with the number of muslims increasing by the most substantial margin to a total of about  per cent. the muslim population has increased from . million in  to . million in , making it the secondlargest religious group in the uk.the church of england is the established church in england. it retains a representation in the uk parliament, and the british monarch is its supreme governor. in scotland, the church of scotland is recognised as the national church. it is not subject to state control, and the british monarch is an ordinary member, required to swear an oath to maintain and preserve the protestant religion and presbyterian church government upon his or her accession. the church in wales was disestablished in  and, because the church of ireland was disestablished in  before the partition of ireland, there is no established church in northern ireland. although there are no ukwide data in the  census on adherence to individual christian denominations, it has been estimated that  per cent of christians are anglican, . per cent catholic,  per cent presbyterian, and . per cent methodist, with small numbers of other protestant denominations such as plymouth brethren, and orthodox churches.

immigration is now contributing to a rising uk population, with arrivals and ukborn children of migrants accounting for about half of the population increase between  and . according to official statistics released in ,  per cent of uk live births in  were to mothers born outside the uk. the ons reported that net migration rose from  to  by  per cent to ,.in , approximately , foreign nationals were naturalised as british citizens, the highest number since . this figure fell to around , in . between  and , the average number of british citizenships granted annually was ,. the most common previous nationalities of those naturalised in  were indian, pakistani, filipino, nigerian, bangladeshi, nepali, chinese, south african, polish and somali. the total number of grants of settlement, which confer permanent residence in the uk but not citizenship, was approximately , in , higher than the previous two years.emigration was an important feature of british society in the th century. between  and , around . million people emigrated from britain and . million from ireland. estimates show that by the end of the th century, some  million people of british and irish descent were permanently settled around the globe. today, at least . million ukborn people live abroad, mainly in australia, spain, the united states and canada.

education in the united kingdom is a devolved matter, with each country having a separate education system. about  per cent of the united kingdom population has a university or college degree, which is the highest percentage in europe, and among the highest percentages in the world. the united kingdom is home to many universities, including the university of oxford and university of cambridge which often achieve first place on global rankings.in , the programme for international student assessment, coordinated by the oecd, ranked the overall knowledge and skills of british yearolds as th in the world in reading, literacy, mathematics, and science. the average british student scored ., well above the oecd average of .

the modernsystem of universal publicly funded in the united kingdom has its origins in the creation of the national health service  in  which still exists to this day and is the primary healthcare provider in the united kingdom. the widespread popularity of the nhs has led to it being described as a national religion. healthcare in the united kingdom is a devolved matter and each country has its own system of universal publicly funded healthcare, although private healthcare is also available. public healthcare is provided to all uk permanent residents and is mostly free at the point of need, being paid for from general taxation. the world health organization, in , ranked the provision of healthcare in the united kingdom as fifteenth best in europe and eighteenth in the world.since , expenditure on healthcare has been increased significantly. the  oecd data, which incorporates in health a chunk of what in the uk is classified as social care, has the uk spending , per head. in  the uk spent , per person on healthcare, around the median for members of the organisation for economic cooperation and development.regulatory bodies are organised on a ukwide basis such as the general medical council, the nursing and midwifery council and nongovernmentalbased, such as the royal colleges. political and operational responsibility for healthcare lies with four national executives; healthcare in england is the responsibility of the uk government; healthcare in northern ireland is the responsibility of the northern ireland executive; healthcare in scotland is the responsibility of the scottish government; and healthcare in wales is the responsibility of the welsh government. each national health service has different policies and priorities, resulting in contrasts.

the culture of the united kingdom is influenced by many factors including the nations island status; its history; and being a political union of four countries with each preserving elements of distinctive traditions, customs and symbolism. as a result of the british empire, british influence can be observed in the language, culture and legal systems of many of its former colonies, in particular, the united states, australia, canada, new zealand, and ireland, a common culture known today as the anglosphere. the substantial cultural influence of the united kingdom has led to it being described as a cultural superpower. a global opinion poll for the bbc saw the united kingdom ranked the third most positively viewed nation in the world  in  and .

british literature includes literature associated with the united kingdom, the isle of man and the channel islands. most british literature is in english. in , some , books were published in the united kingdom and in  it was the largest publisher of books in the world.the english playwright and poet william shakespeare is widely regarded as the greatest dramatist of all time. the thcentury english crime writer agatha christie is the bestselling novelist of all time. twelve of the top  of  novels by british writers chosen by a bbc poll of global critics were written by women; these included works by george eliot, virginia woolf, charlotte and emily bront, mary shelley, jane austen, doris lessing and zadie smith.scotlands contributions include arthur conan doyle , sir walter scott, j. m. barrie, robert louis stevenson and the poet robert burns. more recently hugh macdiarmid and neil m. gunn contributed to the scottish renaissance, with grimmer works from ian rankin and iain banks. scotlands capital, edinburgh, was unescos first worldwide city of literature.welsh literature includes britains oldest known poem, y gododdin, which was composed most likely in the late th century. it was written in cumbric or old welsh and contains the earliest known reference to king arthur. the arthurian legend was further developed by geoffrey of monmouth. poet dafydd ap gwilym  is regarded as one of the greatest european poets of his age. daniel owen is credited as the first welshlanguage novelist, publishing rhys lewis in . the bestknown of the anglowelsh poets are dylan thomas and r. s. thomas, the latter nominated for the nobel prize in literature in . leading welsh novelists of the twentieth century include richard llewellyn and kate roberts.irish writers, living at a time when all of ireland was part of the united kingdom, include oscar wilde, bram stoker and george bernard shaw. there have been many authors whose origins were from outside the united kingdom but who moved to the uk, including joseph conrad, t. s. eliot, kazuo ishiguro, sir salman rushdie and ezra pound.

the united kingdom is famous for the tradition of british empiricism, a branch of the philosophy of knowledge that states that only knowledge verified by experience is valid, and scottish philosophy, sometimes referred to as the scottish school of common sense. the most famous philosophers of british empiricism are john locke, george berkeley and david hume; while dugald stewart, thomas reid and william hamilton were major exponents of the scottish common sense school. two britons are also notable for the ethical theory of utilitarianism, a moral philosophy first used by jeremy bentham and later by john stuart mill in his short work utilitarianism.

various styles of music have become popular in the uk, including the indigenous folk music of england, wales, scotland and northern ireland. historically, there has been exceptional renaissance music from the tudor period, with masses, madrigals and lute music by thomas tallis, john taverner, william byrd, orlando gibbons and john dowland. after the stuart restoration, an english tradition of dramatic masques, anthems and airs became established, led by henry purcell, followed by thomas arne and others. the germanborn composer george frideric handel became a naturalised british citizen in , when he composed the anthem zadok the priest for the coronation of george ii; it became the traditional ceremonial music for anointing all future monarchs. handels many oratorios, such as his famous messiah, were written in the english language. in the second half of the th century, as arthur sullivan and his librettist w. s. gilbert wrote their popular savoy operas, edward elgars wide range of music rivalled that of his contemporaries on the continent. increasingly, however, composers became inspired by the english countryside and its folk music, notably gustav holst, ralph vaughan williams, and benjamin britten, a pioneer of modern british opera. among the many postwar composers, some of the most notable have made their own personal choice of musical identity peter maxwell davies , harrison birtwistle , and john tavener .according to the new grove dictionary of music and musicians, the term pop music originated in britain in the mids to describe rock and rolls fusion with the new youth music. the oxford dictionary of music states that artists such as the beatles and the rolling stones drove pop music to the forefront of popular music in the early s. birmingham became known as the birthplace of heavy metal, with the band black sabbath starting there in the s. in the following years, britain widely occupied a part in the development of rock music, with british acts pioneering hard rock; raga rock; heavy metal; space rock; glam rock; gothic rock, psychedelic rock, and punk rock. british acts also developed neo soul and created dubstep. the modern uk is known to produce some of the most prominent englishspeaking rappers along with the united states, including stormzy, kano, yxng bane, ramz, little simz and skepta.

the beatles have international sales of over  billion units and are the biggestselling and most influential band in the history of popular music. other prominent british contributors to have influenced popular music over the last  years include the rolling stones, pink floyd, queen, led zeppelin, the bee gees, and elton john, all of whom have worldwide record sales of  million or more. the brit awards are the bpis annual music awards, and some of the british recipients of the outstanding contribution to music award include the who, david bowie, eric clapton, rod stewart, the police, and fleetwood mac . more recent uk music acts that have had international success include george michael, oasis, spice girls, radiohead, coldplay, arctic monkeys, robbie williams, amy winehouse, susan boyle, adele, ed sheeran, lewis capaldi, one direction and harry styles.a number of uk cities are known for their music. acts from liverpool have had  uk chart number  hit singles, more per capita than any other city worldwide. glasgows contribution to music was recognised in  when it was named a unesco city of music. manchester played a role in the spread of dance music such as acid house, and from the mids, britpop. london and bristol are closely associated with the origins of electronic music subgenres such as drum and bass and trip hop. influential uk dance acts include the prodigy, underworld, leftfield, basement jaxx, chemical brothers, sub focus, chase  status and calvin harris.

major british artists include the romantics william blake, john constable, samuel palmer and j. m. w. turner; the portrait painters sir joshua reynolds and lucian freud; the landscape artists thomas gainsborough and l. s. lowry; the pioneer of the arts and crafts movement william morris; the figurative painter francis bacon; the pop artists peter blake, richard hamilton and david hockney; the pioneers of conceptual art movement art  language; the collaborative duo gilbert and george; the abstract artist howard hodgkin; and the sculptors antony gormley, anish kapoor and henry moore. during the late s and s the saatchi gallery in london helped to bring to public attention a group of multigenre artists who would become known as the young british artists damien hirst, chris ofili, rachel whiteread, tracey emin, mark wallinger, steve mcqueen, sam taylorwood and the chapman brothers are among the betterknown members of this loosely affiliated movement.

the royal academy in london is a key organisation for the promotion of the visual arts in the united kingdom. major schools of art in the uk include the sixschool university of the arts london, which includes the central saint martins college of art and design and chelsea college of art and design; goldsmiths, university of london; the slade school of fine art ; the glasgow school of art; the royal college of art; and the ruskin school of drawing and fine art . the courtauld institute of art is a leading centre for the teaching of the history of art. important art galleries in the united kingdom include the national gallery, national portrait gallery, tate britain and tate modern .

the united kingdom has had a considerable influence on the history of the cinema. the british directors alfred hitchcock, whose film vertigo is considered by some critics as the best film of all time, and david lean are among the most critically acclaimed of all time. many british actors have achieved international fame and critical success. some of the most commercially successful films of all time have been produced in the united kingdom, including two of the highestgrossing film franchises .in , british films grossed around  billion worldwide and achieved a market share of around  per cent globally and  per cent in the united kingdom. uk boxoffice takings totalled  million in , with around  million admissions. the annual british academy film awards are hosted by the british academy of film and television arts.

british cuisine developed from various influences reflective of its land, settlements, arrivals of new settlers and immigrants, trade and colonialism. the british empire facilitated a knowledge of indian cuisine with its strong, penetrating spices and herbs. british cuisine has absorbed the cultural influence of those who have settled in britain, producing hybrid dishes, such as chicken tikka masala. the british have embraced world cuisine and regularly eat recipes or fast food from europe, the caribbean and asia. afternoon tea is a light afternoon meal served with tea in tea rooms and hotels around the united kingdom, with the tradition dating back to around .a  yougov poll rated classic british food, the following had more than  of people like them who had tried them sunday roast, yorkshire pudding, fish and chips, crumpets, and full english breakfast. sweet foods are common within british cuisine, and there is a long list of british desserts.

vegan and vegetarian diets have increased in britain in recent years. in , a survey found that  of british respondents eat a plantbased diet and  of respondents have a favourable view of plantbased diets.

the bbc, founded in , is the uks publicly funded radio, television and internet broadcasting corporation, and is the oldest and largest broadcaster in the world. it operates numerous television and radio stations in the uk and abroad and its domestic services are funded by the television licence. the bbc world service is an international broadcaster owned and operated by the bbc. it is the worlds largest of any kind. it broadcasts radio news, speech and discussions in more than  languages.other major players in the uk media include itv, which operates  of the  regional television broadcasters that make up the itv network, and sky. newspapers produced in the united kingdom include the daily mail, the guardian, the telegraph, the times, and the financial times. magazines and journals published in the united kingdom that have achieved worldwide circulation include the spectator, the economist, new statesman, and radio times.

london dominates the media sector in the uk national newspapers and television and radio are largely based there, although mediacityuk in manchester is also a significant national media centre. edinburgh and glasgow, and cardiff, are important centres of newspaper and broadcasting production in scotland and wales, respectively. the uk publishing sector, including books, directories and databases, journals, magazines and business media, newspapers and news agencies, has a combined turnover of around  billion and employs around , people. in , the uk published , book titles per million inhabitants, more than any other country, much of this being exported to other anglophone countries.in , . per cent of the uk population were internet users, the highest proportion among the  countries with the largest total number of users in that year. the british video game industry is the largest in europe, and, since , the uk has the largest video game market in europe by sales, overtaking germany. it is the worlds thirdlargest producer of video games after japan and the united states.

association football, tennis, table tennis, badminton, rugby union, rugby league, rugby sevens, golf, boxing, netball, water polo, field hockey, billiards, darts, rowing, rounders and cricket originated or were substantially developed in the uk, with the rules and codes of many modern sports invented and codified in late thcentury victorian britain.a  poll found that football is the most popular sport in the uk. england is recognised by fifa as the birthplace of club football, and the football association is the oldest of its kind, with the rules of football first drafted in  by ebenezer cobb morley. each of the home nations  has its own football association, national team and league system, and each is individually a governing member of the international football association board alongside fifa. the english top division, the premier league, is the most watched football league in the world. the first international football match was contested by england and scotland on  november . england, scotland, wales and northern ireland usually compete as separate countries in international competitions.in , rugby union was ranked the second most popular sport in the uk. the sport was created in rugby school, warwickshire, and the first rugby international took place on  march  between england and scotland. england, scotland, wales, ireland, france and italy compete in the six nations championship, which is the premier international rugby union tournament in the northern hemisphere. sports governing bodies in england, scotland, wales and ireland organise and regulate the game separately. every four years, the home nations make a combined team known as the british and irish lions which tours australia, new zealand and south africa.

the united kingdom hosted the summer olympic games in ,  and , with london acting as the host city on all three occasions. birmingham hosted the  commonwealth games, the seventh time a constitute country in the united kingdom hosted the commonwealth games .

the flag of the united kingdom is the union flag . it was created in  by the superimposition of the flag of england, representing saint george, on the flag of scotland, representing saint andrew, and was updated in  with the addition of saint patricks flag. wales is not represented in the union flag, as wales had been conquered and annexed to england prior to the formation of the united kingdom. the possibility of redesigning the union flag to include representation of wales has not been completely ruled out. the national anthem of the united kingdom is god save the king, with king replaced with queen in the lyrics whenever the monarch is a woman.

britannia is a national personification of the united kingdom, originating from roman britain. beside the lion and the unicorn and the dragon of heraldry, the bulldog is an iconic animal and commonly represented with the union flag. a now rare personification is a character originating in the th century, john bull.england, wales, and scotland each have a number of their own national symbols, including their national flags. northern ireland also has a number of symbols, many of which are shared with republic of ireland.

barack hussein obama ii  is an american politician who served as the th president of the united states from  to . a member of the democratic party, he was the first africanamerican  president of the united states. obama previously served as a u.s. senator representing illinois from  to , as an illinois state senator from  to , and as a civil rights lawyer and university lecturer. 

obama was born in honolulu, hawaii. he graduated from columbia university in  with a b.a. in political science and later worked as a community organizer in chicago. in , obama enrolled in harvard law school, where he was the first black president of the harvard law review. he became a civil rights attorney and an academic, teaching constitutional law at the university of chicago law school from  to . he also went into elective politics. obama represented the th district in the illinois senate from  until , when he successfully ran for the u.s. senate. in , after a close primary campaign against hillary clinton, he was nominated by the democratic party for president and chose joe biden as his running mate. obama was elected president, defeating republican nominee john mccain in the presidential election and was inaugurated on january , . nine months later he was named the  nobel peace prize laureate, a decision that drew a mixture of praise and criticism.

obamas firstterm actions addressed the global financial crisis and included a major stimulus package to guide the economy to recover from the great recession, a partial extension of george w. bushs tax cuts, legislation to reform health care, a major financial regulation reform bill, and the end of a major u.s. military presence in iraq. obama also appointed supreme court justices sonia sotomayor and elena kagan, the former being the first hispanic american on the supreme court. he ordered the counterterrorism raid which killed osama bin laden and downplayed bushs counterinsurgency model, expanding air strikes and making extensive use of special forces while encouraging greater reliance on hostgovernment militaries. obama also ordered military involvement in libya in order to implement un security council resolution , contributing to the overthrow of muammar gaddafi.

after winning reelection by defeating republican opponent mitt romney, obama was sworn in for a second term on january , . in his second term, obama took steps to combat climate change, signing a major international climate agreement and an executive order to limit carbon emissions. obama also presided over the implementation of the affordable care act and other legislation passed in his first term, and he negotiated a nuclear agreement with iran and normalized relations with cuba. the number of american soldiers in afghanistan fell dramatically during obamas second term, though u.s. soldiers remained in the country throughout obamas presidency. obama promoted inclusion for lgbt americans, culminating in the supreme courts decision to strike down samesex marriage bans as unconstitutional in obergefell v. hodges.

obama left office on january , , and continues to reside in washington, d.c. his presidential library in chicago began construction in . since leaving office, obama has remained active in democratic politics, including campaigning for candidates in various american elections, such as his former vice president joe biden in his successful bid for president in . outside of politics, obama has published three bestselling books dreams from my father , the audacity of hope  and a promised land . rankings by scholars and historians, in which he has been featured since , place him in the middle to upper tier of american presidents.

obama was born on august , , at kapiolani medical center for women and children in honolulu, hawaii. he is the only president born outside the contiguous  states. he was born to an american mother and a kenyan father. his mother, ann dunham , was born in wichita, kansas and was of english, welsh, german, swiss, and irish descent. in  it was discovered her greatgreatgrandfather falmouth kearney emigrated from the village of moneygall, ireland to the us in . in july , ancestry.com found a strong likelihood that dunham was descended from john punch, an enslaved african man who lived in the colony of virginia during the seventeenth century. obamas father, barack obama sr. , was a married luo kenyan from nyangoma kogelo. his last name, obama, was derived from his luo descent. obamas parents met in  in a russian language class at the university of hawaii at mnoa, where his father was a foreign student on a scholarship. the couple married in wailuku, hawaii, on february , , six months before obama was born.in late august , a few weeks after he was born, barack and his mother moved to the university of washington in seattle, where they lived for a year. during that time, baracks father completed his undergraduate degree in economics in hawaii, graduating in june . he left to attend graduate school on a scholarship at harvard university, where he earned an m.a. in economics. obamas parents divorced in march . obama sr. returned to kenya in , where he married for a third time and worked for the kenyan government as the senior economic analyst in the ministry of finance. he visited his son in hawaii only once, at christmas , before he was killed in an automobile accident in , when obama was  years old. recalling his early childhood, obama said that my father looked nothing like the people around methat he was black as pitch, my mother white as milkbarely registered in my mind. he described his struggles as a young adult to reconcile social perceptions of his multiracial heritage.in , dunham met lolo soetoro at the university of hawaii; he was an indonesian eastwest center graduate student in geography. the couple married on molokai on march , . after two oneyear extensions of his j visa, lolo returned to indonesia in . his wife and stepson followed sixteen months later in . the family initially lived in the menteng dalam neighborhood in the tebet district of south jakarta. from , they lived in a wealthier neighborhood in the menteng district of central jakarta.

at the age of six, obama and his mother had moved to indonesia to join his stepfather. from age six to ten, he was registered in school as barry and attended local indonesianlanguage schools sekolah dasar katolik santo fransiskus asisi  for two years and sekolah dasar negeri menteng   for one and a half years, supplemented by englishlanguage calvert school homeschooling by his mother. as a result of his four years in jakarta, he was able to speak indonesian fluently as a child. during his time in indonesia, obamas stepfather taught him to be resilient and gave him a pretty hardheaded assessment of how the world works.in , obama returned to honolulu to live with his maternal grandparents, madelyn and stanley dunham. he attended punahou schoola private college preparatory schoolwith the aid of a scholarship from fifth grade until he graduated from high school in . in high school, obama continued to use the nickname barry which he kept until making a visit to kenya in . obama lived with his mother and halfsister, maya soetoro, in hawaii for three years from  to  while his mother was a graduate student in anthropology at the university of hawaii. obama chose to stay in hawaii when his mother and halfsister returned to indonesia in , so his mother could begin anthropology field work. his mother spent most of the next two decades in indonesia, divorcing lolo soetoro in  and earning a phd degree in , before dying in  in hawaii following unsuccessful treatment for ovarian and uterine cancer.of his years in honolulu, obama wrote the opportunity that hawaii offered  to experience a variety of cultures in a climate of mutual respect  became an integral part of my world view, and a basis for the values that i hold most dear. obama has also written and talked about using alcohol, marijuana, and cocaine during his teenage years to push questions of who i was out of my mind. obama was also a member of the choom gang , a selfnamed group of friends who spent time together and occasionally smoked marijuana.

after graduating from high school in , obama moved to los angeles to attend occidental college on a full scholarship. in february , obama made his first public speech, calling for occidental to participate in the disinvestment from south africa in response to that nations policy of apartheid. in mid, obama traveled to indonesia to visit his mother and halfsister maya, and visited the families of college friends in pakistan for three weeks. later in , he transferred to columbia university in new york city as a junior, where he majored in political science with a specialty in international relations and in english literature and lived offcampus on west th street. he graduated with a bachelor of arts degree in  and a . gpa. after graduating, obama worked for about a year at the business international corporation, where he was a financial researcher and writer, then as a project coordinator for the new york public interest research group on the city college of new york campus for three months in .

two years after graduating from columbia, obama moved from new york to chicago when he was hired as director of the developing communities project, a faithbased community organization originally comprising eight catholic parishes in roseland, west pullman, and riverdale on chicagos south side. he worked there as a community organizer from june  to may . he helped set up a job training program, a college preparatory tutoring program, and a tenants rights organization in altgeld gardens. obama also worked as a consultant and instructor for the gamaliel foundation, a community organizing institute. in mid, he traveled for the first time in europe for three weeks and then for five weeks in kenya, where he met many of his paternal relatives for the first time.

despite being offered a full scholarship to northwestern university school of law, obama enrolled at harvard law school in the fall of , living in nearby somerville, massachusetts. he was selected as an editor of the harvard law review at the end of his first year, president of the journal in his second year, and research assistant to the constitutional scholar laurence tribe while at harvard. during his summers, he returned to chicago, where he worked as a summer associate at the law firms of sidley austin in  and hopkins  sutter in . obamas election as the first black president of the harvard law review gained national media attention and led to a publishing contract and advance for a book about race relations, which evolved into a personal memoir. the manuscript was published in mid as dreams from my father. obama graduated from harvard law in  with a juris doctor magna cum laude.

in , obama accepted a twoyear position as visiting law and government fellow at the university of chicago law school to work on his first book. he then taught constitutional law at the university of chicago law school for twelve years, first as a lecturer from  to , and then as a senior lecturer from  to .from april to october , obama directed illinoiss project vote, a voter registration campaign with ten staffers and seven hundred volunteer registrars; it achieved its goal of registering , of , unregistered african americans in the state, leading crains chicago business to name obama to its  list of  under forty powers to be.

in a  interview, obama highlighted the diversity of his extended family its like a little miniunited nations, he said. ive got relatives who look like bernie mac, and ive got relatives who look like margaret thatcher. obama has a halfsister with whom he was raised  and seven other halfsiblings from his kenyan fathers family, six of them living. obamas mother was survived by her kansasborn mother, madelyn dunham, until her death on november , , two days before his election to the presidency. obama also has roots in ireland; he met with his irish cousins in moneygall in may . in dreams from my father, obama ties his mothers family history to possible native american ancestors and distant relatives of jefferson davis, president of the confederate states of america during the american civil war. he also shares distant ancestors in common with george w. bush and dick cheney, among others.obama lived with anthropologist sheila miyoshi jager while he was a community organizer in chicago in the s. he proposed to her twice, but both jager and her parents turned him down. the relationship was not made public until may , several months after his presidency had ended.

in june , obama met michelle robinson when he was employed as a summer associate at the chicago law firm of sidley austin. robinson was assigned for three months as obamas adviser at the firm, and she joined him at several group social functions but declined his initial requests to date. they began dating later that summer, became engaged in , and were married on october , . after suffering a miscarriage, michelle underwent in vitro fertilization to conceive their children. the couples first daughter, malia ann, was born in , followed by a second daughter, natasha , in . the obama daughters attended the university of chicago laboratory schools. when they moved to washington, d.c., in january , the girls started at the sidwell friends school. the obamas had two portuguese water dogs; the first, a male named bo, was a gift from senator ted kennedy. in , bo was joined by sunny, a female. bo died of cancer on may , .obama is a supporter of the chicago white sox, and he threw out the first pitch at the  alcs when he was still a senator. in , he threw out the ceremonial first pitch at the allstar game while wearing a white sox jacket. he is also primarily a chicago bears football fan in the nfl, but in his childhood and adolescence was a fan of the pittsburgh steelers, and rooted for them ahead of their victory in super bowl xliii  days after he took office as president. in , obama invited the  chicago bears to the white house; the team had not visited the white house after their super bowl win in  due to the space shuttle challenger disaster. he plays basketball, a sport he participated in as a member of his high schools varsity team, and he is lefthanded.in , the obama family applied the proceeds of a book deal and moved from a hyde park, chicago condominium to a . million house  in neighboring kenwood, chicago. the purchase of an adjacent lotand sale of part of it to obama by the wife of developer, campaign donor and friend tony rezkoattracted media attention because of rezkos subsequent indictment and conviction on political corruption charges that were unrelated to obama.in december , money magazine estimated obamas net worth at . million . their  tax return showed a household income of . millionup from about . million in  and . million in mostly from sales of his books. on his  income of . million, he gave  percent to nonprofit organizations, including , to fisher house foundation, a charity assisting wounded veterans families, allowing them to reside near where the veteran is receiving medical treatments. per his  financial disclosure, obama may be worth as much as  million.

obama is a protestant christian whose religious views developed in his adult life. he wrote in the audacity of hope that he was not raised in a religious household. he described his mother, raised by nonreligious parents, as being detached from religion, yet in many ways the most spiritually awakened person ... i have ever known, and a lonely witness for secular humanism. he described his father as a confirmed atheist by the time his parents met, and his stepfather as a man who saw religion as not particularly useful. obama explained how, through working with black churches as a community organizer while in his twenties, he came to understand the power of the africanamerican religious tradition to spur social change.

in january , obama told christianity today i am a christian, and i am a devout christian. i believe in the redemptive death and resurrection of jesus christ. i believe that faith gives me a path to be cleansed of sin and have eternal life. on september , , obama released a statement commenting on his religious views, saying

im a christian by choice. my family didntfrankly, they werent folks who went to church every week. and my mother was one of the most spiritual people i knew, but she didnt raise me in the church. so i came to my christian faith later in life, and it was because the precepts of jesus christ spoke to me in terms of the kind of life that i would want to leadbeing my brothers and sisters keeper, treating others as they would treat me.

obama met trinity united church of christ pastor jeremiah wright in october  and became a member of trinity in . during obamas first presidential campaign in may , he resigned from trinity after some of wrights statements were criticized. since moving to washington, d.c., in , the obama family has attended several protestant churches, including shiloh baptist church and st. johns episcopal church, as well as evergreen chapel at camp david, but the members of the family do not attend church on a regular basis.in , he said that he gets inspiration from a few items that remind him of all the different people ive met along the way, adding i carry these around all the time. im not that superstitious, so its not like i think i necessarily have to have them on me at all times. the items, a whole bowl full, include rosary beads given to him by pope francis, a figurine of the hindu deity hanuman, a coptic cross from ethiopia, a small buddha statue given by a monk, and a metal poker chip that used to be the lucky charm of a motorcyclist in iowa.

he joined davis, miner, barnhill  galland, a attorney law firm specializing in civil rights litigation and neighborhood economic development, where he was an associate for three years from  to , then of counsel from  to . in , he was listed as one of the lawyers in buycksroberson v. citibank fed. sav. bank,  c  . this class action lawsuit was filed in  with selma buycksroberson as lead plaintiff and alleged that citibank federal savings bank had engaged in practices forbidden under the equal credit opportunity act and the fair housing act. the case was settled out of court. final judgment was issued on may , , with citibank federal savings bank agreeing to pay attorney fees.from  to , obama served on the boards of directors of the woods fund of chicagowhich in  had been the first foundation to fund the developing communities projectand of the joyce foundation. he served on the board of directors of the chicago annenberg challenge from  to , as founding president and chairman of the board of directors from  to . obamas law license became inactive in .

obama was elected to the illinois senate in , succeeding democratic state senator alice palmer from illinoiss th district, which, at that time, spanned chicago south side neighborhoods from hyde parkkenwood south to south shore and west to chicago lawn. once elected, obama gained bipartisan support for legislation that reformed ethics and health care laws. he sponsored a law that increased tax credits for lowincome workers, negotiated welfare reform, and promoted increased subsidies for childcare. in , as cochairman of the bipartisan joint committee on administrative rules, obama supported republican governor ryans payday loan regulations and predatory mortgage lending regulations aimed at averting home foreclosures.he was reelected to the illinois senate in , defeating republican yesse yehudah in the general election, and was reelected again in . in , he lost a democratic primary race for illinoiss st congressional district in the united states house of representatives to fourterm incumbent bobby rush by a margin of two to one.in january , obama became chairman of the illinois senates health and human services committee when democrats, after a decade in the minority, regained a majority. he sponsored and led unanimous, bipartisan passage of legislation to monitor racial profiling by requiring police to record the race of drivers they detained, and legislation making illinois the first state to mandate videotaping of homicide interrogations. during his  general election campaign for the u.s. senate, police representatives credited obama for his active engagement with police organizations in enacting death penalty reforms. obama resigned from the illinois senate in november  following his election to the u.s. senate.

in may , obama commissioned a poll to assess his prospects in a  u.s. senate race. he created a campaign committee, began raising funds, and lined up political media consultant david axelrod by august . obama formally announced his candidacy in january .obama was an early opponent of the george w. bush administrations  invasion of iraq. on october , , the day president bush and congress agreed on the joint resolution authorizing the iraq war, obama addressed the first highprofile chicago antiiraq war rally, and spoke out against the war. he addressed another antiwar rally in march  and told the crowd its not too late to stop the war.decisions by republican incumbent peter fitzgerald and his democratic predecessor carol moseley braun to not participate in the election resulted in wideopen democratic and republican primary contests involving  candidates. in the march  primary election, obama won in an unexpected landslidewhich overnight made him a rising star within the national democratic party, started speculation about a presidential future, and led to the reissue of his memoir, dreams from my father. in july , obama delivered the keynote address at the  democratic national convention, seen by nine million viewers. his speech was well received and elevated his status within the democratic party.obamas expected opponent in the general election, republican primary winner jack ryan, withdrew from the race in june . six weeks later, alan keyes accepted the republican nomination to replace ryan. in the november  general election, obama won with  percent of the vote, the largest margin of victory for a senate candidate in illinois history. he took  of the states  counties, including several where democrats traditionally do not do well.

obama was sworn in as a senator on january , , becoming the only senate member of the congressional black caucus. he introduced two initiatives that bore his name lugarobama, which expanded the nunnlugar cooperative threat reduction concept to conventional weapons; and the federal funding accountability and transparency act of , which authorized the establishment of usaspending.gov, a web search engine on federal spending. on june , , senator obamaalong with senators tom carper, tom coburn, and john mccainintroduced followup legislation strengthening transparency and accountability in federal spending act of . he also cosponsored the secure america and orderly immigration act.in december , president bush signed into law the democratic republic of the congo relief, security, and democracy promotion act, marking the first federal legislation to be enacted with obama as its primary sponsor. in january , obama and senator feingold introduced a corporate jet provision to the honest leadership and open government act, which was signed into law in september .later in , obama sponsored an amendment to the defense authorization act to add safeguards for personalitydisorder military discharges. this amendment passed the full senate in the spring of . he sponsored the iran sanctions enabling act supporting divestment of state pension funds from irans oil and gas industry, which was never enacted but later incorporated in the comprehensive iran sanctions, accountability, and divestment act of ; and cosponsored legislation to reduce risks of nuclear terrorism. obama also sponsored a senate amendment to the state childrens health insurance program, providing one year of job protection for family members caring for soldiers with combatrelated injuries.obama held assignments on the senate committees for foreign relations, environment and public works and veterans affairs through december . in january , he left the environment and public works committee and took additional assignments with health, education, labor and pensions and homeland security and governmental affairs. he also became chairman of the senates subcommittee on european affairs. as a member of the senate foreign relations committee, obama made official trips to eastern europe, the middle east, central asia and africa. he met with mahmoud abbas before abbas became president of the palestinian national authority, and gave a speech at the university of nairobi in which he condemned corruption within the kenyan government.obama resigned his senate seat on november , , to focus on his transition period for the presidency.

on february , , obama announced his candidacy for president of the united states in front of the old state capitol building in springfield, illinois. the choice of the announcement site was viewed as symbolic, as it was also where abraham lincoln delivered his house divided speech in . obama emphasized issues of rapidly ending the iraq war, increasing energy independence, and reforming the health care system.numerous candidates entered the democratic party presidential primaries. the field narrowed to obama and senator hillary clinton after early contests, with the race remaining close throughout the primary process, but with obama gaining a steady lead in pledged delegates due to better longrange planning, superior fundraising, dominant organizing in caucus states, and better exploitation of delegate allocation rules. 

on june , , obama had received enough votes to clinch his nomination. after an initial hesitation to concede, on june , clinton ended her campaign and endorsed obama. on august , , obama announced his selection of delaware senator joe biden as his vice presidential running mate. obama selected biden from a field speculated to include former indiana governor and senator evan bayh and virginia governor tim kaine. at the democratic national convention in denver, colorado, hillary clinton called for her supporters to endorse obama, and she and bill clinton gave convention speeches in his support. obama delivered his acceptance speech at invesco field at mile high stadium to a crowd of about eightyfour thousand; the speech was viewed by over three million people worldwide. during both the primary process and the general election, obamas campaign set numerous fundraising records, particularly in the quantity of small donations. on june , , obama became the first majorparty presidential candidate to turn down public financing in the general election since the system was created in .john mccain was nominated as the republican candidate, and he selected sarah palin as his running mate. obama and mccain engaged in three presidential debates in september and october . on november , obama won the presidency with  electoral votes to  received by mccain. obama won . percent of the popular vote to mccains . percent. he became the first africanamerican to be elected president. obama delivered his victory speech before hundreds of thousands of supporters in chicagos grant park. he is one of the three united states senators moved directly from the u.s. senate to the white house, the others being warren g. harding and john f. kennedy.

on april , , obama filed election papers with the federal election commission and then announced his reelection campaign for  in a video titled it begins with us that he posted on his website. as the incumbent president, he ran virtually unopposed in the democratic party presidential primaries, and on april , , obama secured the  convention delegates needed to win the democratic nomination. at the democratic national convention in charlotte, north carolina, obama and joe biden were formally nominated by former president bill clinton as the democratic party candidates for president and vice president in the general election. their main opponents were republicans mitt romney, the former governor of massachusetts, and representative paul ryan of wisconsin.on november , , obama won  electoral votes, exceeding the  required for him to be reelected as president. with . percent of the popular vote, obama became the first democratic president since franklin d. roosevelt to win the majority of the popular vote twice. obama addressed supporters and volunteers at chicagos mccormick place after his reelection and said tonight you voted for action, not politics as usual. you elected us to focus on your jobs, not ours. and in the coming weeks and months, i am looking forward to reaching out and working with leaders of both parties.

the inauguration of barack obama as the th president took place on january , . in his first few days in office, obama issued executive orders and presidential memoranda directing the u.s. military to develop plans to withdraw troops from iraq. he ordered the closing of the guantanamo bay detention camp, but congress prevented the closure by refusing to appropriate the required funds and preventing moving any guantanamo detainee. obama reduced the secrecy given to presidential records. he also revoked president george w. bushs restoration of president ronald reagans mexico city policy which prohibited federal aid to international family planning organizations that perform or provide counseling about abortion.

the first bill signed into law by obama was the lilly ledbetter fair pay act of , relaxing the statute of limitations for equalpay lawsuits. five days later, he signed the reauthorization of the state childrens health insurance program to cover an additional four million uninsured children. in march , obama reversed a bushera policy that had limited funding of embryonic stem cell research and pledged to develop strict guidelines on the research.

obama appointed two women to serve on the supreme court in the first two years of his presidency. he nominated sonia sotomayor on may , , to replace retiring associate justice david souter. she was confirmed on august , , becoming the first supreme court justice of hispanic descent. obama nominated elena kagan on may , , to replace retiring associate justice john paul stevens. she was confirmed on august , , bringing the number of women sitting simultaneously on the court to three for the first time in american history.on march , , obama created the white house council on women and girls, which formed part of the office of intergovernmental affairs, having been established by executive order  with a broad mandate to advise him on issues relating to the welfare of american women and girls. the council was chaired by senior advisor to the president valerie jarrett. obama also established the white house task force to protect students from sexual assault through a government memorandum on january , , with a broad mandate to advise him on issues relating to sexual assault on college and university campuses throughout the united states. the cochairs of the task force were vice president joe biden and jarrett. the task force was a development out of the white house council on women and girls and office of the vice president of the united states, and prior to that the  violence against women act first drafted by biden.

in july , obama launched the priority enforcement program, an immigration enforcement program that had been pioneered by george w. bush, and the secure communities fingerprinting and immigration status datasharing program.in a major space policy speech in april , obama announced a planned change in direction at nasa, the u.s. space agency. he ended plans for a return of human spaceflight to the moon and development of the ares i rocket, ares v rocket and constellation program, in favor of funding earth science projects, a new rocket type, research and development for an eventual crewed mission to mars, and ongoing missions to the international space station.

on january , , one month after the sandy hook elementary school shooting, obama signed  executive orders and outlined a series of sweeping proposals regarding gun control. he urged congress to reintroduce an expired ban on militarystyle assault weapons, such as those used in several recent mass shootings, impose limits on ammunition magazines to  rounds, introduce background checks on all gun sales, pass a ban on possession and sale of armorpiercing bullets, introduce harsher penalties for guntraffickers, especially unlicensed dealers who buy arms for criminals and approving the appointment of the head of the federal bureau of alcohol, tobacco, firearms and explosives for the first time since . on january , , obama announced new executive actions extending background check requirements to more gun sellers. in a  editorial in the new york times, obama compared the struggle for what he termed commonsense gun reform to womens suffrage and other civil rights movements in american history. on january , , obama announced new executive actions extending background check requirements to more gun sellers.in , obama signed a fouryear renewal of the patriot act. following the  global surveillance disclosures by whistleblower edward snowden, obama condemned the leak as unpatriotic, but called for increased restrictions on the national security agency  to address violations of privacy. obama continued and expanded surveillance programs set up by george w. bush, while implementing some reforms. he supported legislation that would have limited the nsas ability to collect phone records in bulk under a single program and supported bringing more transparency to the foreign intelligence surveillance court .

in his speeches as president, obama did not make more overt references to race relations than his predecessors, but according to one study, he implemented stronger policy action on behalf of africanamericans than any president since the nixon era.following obamas election, many pondered the existence of a postracial america. however, lingering racial tensions quickly became apparent, and many africanamericans expressed outrage over what they saw as an intense racial animosity directed at obama. the acquittal of george zimmerman following the killing of trayvon martin sparked national outrage, leading to obama giving a speech in which he noted that trayvon martin could have been me  years ago. the shooting of michael brown in ferguson, missouri sparked a wave of protests. these and other events led to the birth of the black lives matter movement, which campaigns against violence and systemic racism toward black people. though obama entered office reluctant to talk about race, by  he began openly discussing the disadvantages faced by many members of minority groups.several incidents during obamas presidency generated disapproval from the africanamerican community and with law enforcement, and obama sought to build trust between law enforcement officials and civil rights activists, with mixed results. some in law enforcement criticized obamas condemnation of racial bias after incidents in which police action led to the death of africanamerican men, while some racial justice activists criticized obamas expressions of empathy for the police. in a march  gallup poll, nearly one third of americans said they worried a great deal about race relations, a higher figure than in any previous gallup poll since .

on october , , obama signed the matthew shepard and james byrd jr. hate crimes prevention act, a measure that expanded the  united states federal hatecrime law to include crimes motivated by a victims actual or perceived gender, sexual orientation, gender identity, or disability. on october , , obama lifted the ban on travel to the united states by those infected with hiv. the lifting of the ban was celebrated by immigration equality. on december , , obama signed the dont ask, dont tell repeal act of , which fulfilled a promise made in the  presidential campaign to end the dont ask, dont tell policy of  that had prevented gay and lesbian people from serving openly in the united states armed forces. in , the pentagon ended the policy that barred transgender people from serving openly in the military.as a candidate for the illinois state senate in , obama stated he favored legalizing samesex marriage. during his senate run in , he said he supported civil unions and domestic partnerships for samesex partners but opposed samesex marriages. in , he reaffirmed this position by stating i believe marriage is between a man and a woman. i am not in favor of gay marriage. on may , , shortly after the official launch of his campaign for reelection as president, obama said his views had evolved, and he publicly affirmed his personal support for the legalization of samesex marriage, becoming the first sitting u.s. president to do so. during his second inaugural address on january , , obama became the first u.s. president in office to call for full equality for gay americans, and the first to mention gay rights or the word gay in an inaugural address. in , the obama administration filed briefs that urged the supreme court to rule in favor of samesex couples in the cases of hollingsworth v. perry  and united states v. windsor .

on february , , obama signed the american recovery and reinvestment act of , a  billion  economic stimulus package aimed at helping the economy recover from the deepening worldwide recession. the act includes increased federal spending for health care, infrastructure, education, various tax breaks and incentives, and direct assistance to individuals. in march , obamas treasury secretary, timothy geithner, took further steps to manage the financial crisis, including introducing the publicprivate investment program for legacy assets, which contains provisions for buying up to  trillion in depreciated real estate assets.

obama intervened in the troubled automotive industry in march , renewing loans for general motors  and chrysler to continue operations while reorganizing. over the following months the white house set terms for both firms bankruptcies, including the sale of chrysler to italian automaker fiat and a reorganization of gm giving the u.s. government a temporary  percent equity stake in the company. in june , dissatisfied with the pace of economic stimulus, obama called on his cabinet to accelerate the investment. he signed into law the car allowance rebate system, known colloquially as cash for clunkers, which temporarily boosted the economy.the bush and obama administrations authorized spending and loan guarantees from the federal reserve and the department of the treasury. these guarantees totaled about . trillion, but only  trillion had been spent by the end of november . on august , , after a lengthy congressional debate over whether to raise the nations debt limit, obama signed the bipartisan budget control act of . the legislation enforced limits on discretionary spending until , established a procedure to increase the debt limit, created a congressional joint select committee on deficit reduction to propose further deficit reduction with a stated goal of achieving at least . trillion in budgetary savings over  years, and established automatic procedures for reducing spending by as much as . trillion if legislation originating with the new joint select committee did not achieve such savings. by passing the legislation, congress was able to prevent a u.s. government default on its obligations.the unemployment rate rose in , reaching a peak in october at . percent and averaging . percent in the fourth quarter. following a decrease to . percent in the first quarter of , the unemployment rate fell to . percent in the second quarter, where it remained for the rest of the year. between february and december , employment rose by . percent, which was less than the average of . percent experienced during comparable periods in the past four employment recoveries. by november , the unemployment rate fell to . percent, decreasing to . percent in the last month of . during , the unemployment rate continued to decline, falling to . percent in the first quarter. gdp growth returned in the third quarter of , expanding at a rate of . percent, followed by a . percent increase in the fourth quarter. growth continued in , posting an increase of . percent in the first quarter, with lesser gains throughout the rest of the year. in july , the federal reserve noted that economic activity continued to increase, but its pace had slowed, and chairman ben bernanke said the economic outlook was unusually uncertain. overall, the economy expanded at a rate of . percent in .

the congressional budget office  and a broad range of economists credit obamas stimulus plan for economic growth. the cbo released a report stating that the stimulus bill increased employment by . million, while conceding that it is impossible to determine how many of the reported jobs would have existed in the absence of the stimulus package. although an april , survey of members of the national association for business economics showed an increase in job creation  for the first time in two years,  percent of  respondents believed the stimulus bill has had no impact on employment. the economy of the united states has grown faster than the other original nato members by a wider margin under president obama than it has anytime since the end of world war ii. the organisation for economic cooperation and development credits the much faster growth in the united states to the stimulus plan of the u.s. and the austerity measures in the european union.within a month of the  midterm elections, obama announced a compromise deal with the congressional republican leadership that included a temporary, twoyear extension of the  and  income tax rates, a oneyear payroll tax reduction, continuation of unemployment benefits, and a new rate and exemption amount for estate taxes. the compromise overcame opposition from some in both parties, and the resulting  billion  tax relief, unemployment insurance reauthorization, and job creation act of  passed with bipartisan majorities in both houses of congress before obama signed it on december , .in december , obama declared that growing income inequality is a defining challenge of our time and called on congress to bolster the safety net and raise wages. this came on the heels of the nationwide strikes of fastfood workers and pope francis criticism of inequality and trickledown economics. obama urged congress to ratify a nation free trade pact called the transpacific partnership.

on april , , an explosion destroyed an offshore drilling rig at the macondo prospect in the gulf of mexico, causing a major sustained oil leak. obama visited the gulf, announced a federal investigation, and formed a bipartisan commission to recommend new safety standards, after a review by secretary of the interior ken salazar and concurrent congressional hearings. he then announced a sixmonth moratorium on new deepwater drilling permits and leases, pending regulatory review. as multiple efforts by bp failed, some in the media and public expressed confusion and criticism over various aspects of the incident, and stated a desire for more involvement by obama and the federal government. prior to the oil spill, on march , , obama ended a ban on oil and gas drilling along the majority of the east coast of the united states and along the coast of northern alaska in an effort to win support for an energy and climate bill and to reduce foreign imports of oil and gas.in july , obama expressed reservations and said he would reject the keystone xl pipeline if it increased carbon pollution or greenhouse emissions. on february , , obama vetoed a bill that would have authorized the pipeline. it was the third veto of obamas presidency and his first major veto.in december , obama permanently banned new offshore oil and gas drilling in most united statesowned waters in the atlantic and arctic oceans using the  outer continental shelf act.obama emphasized the conservation of federal lands during his term in office. he used his power under the antiquities act to create  new national monuments during his presidency and expand four others, protecting a total of ,, acres  of federal lands and waters, more than any other u.s. president.

obama called for congress to pass legislation reforming health care in the united states, a key campaign promise and a top legislative goal. he proposed an expansion of health insurance coverage to cover the uninsured, cap premium increases, and allow people to retain their coverage when they leave or change jobs. his proposal was to spend  billion over ten years and include a government insurance plan, also known as the public option, to compete with the corporate insurance sector as a main component to lowering costs and improving quality of health care. it would also make it illegal for insurers to drop sick people or deny them coverage for preexisting conditions, and require every american to carry health coverage. the plan also includes medical spending cuts and taxes on insurance companies that offer expensive plans.

on july , , house democratic leaders introduced a ,page plan for overhauling the u.s. health care system, which obama wanted congress to approve by the end of . after public debate during the congressional summer recess of , obama delivered a speech to a joint session of congress on september  where he addressed concerns over the proposals. in march , obama lifted a ban on using federal funds for stem cell research.on november , , a health care bill featuring the public option was passed in the house. on december , , the senate passed its own billwithout a public optionon a partyline vote of . on march , , the patient protection and affordable care act  passed by the senate in december was passed in the house by a vote of  to . obama signed the bill into law on march , .the aca includes healthrelated provisions, most of which took effect in , including expanding medicaid eligibility for people making up to  percent of the federal poverty level  starting in , subsidizing insurance premiums for people making up to  percent of the fpl  so their maximum outofpocket payment for annual premiums will be from  percent to . percent of income, providing incentives for businesses to provide health care benefits, prohibiting denial of coverage and denial of claims based on preexisting conditions, establishing health insurance exchanges, prohibiting annual coverage caps, and support for medical research. according to white house and cbo figures, the maximum share of income that enrollees would have to pay would vary depending on their income relative to the federal poverty level.

the costs of these provisions are offset by taxes, fees, and costsaving measures, such as new medicare taxes for those in highincome brackets, taxes on indoor tanning, cuts to the medicare advantage program in favor of traditional medicare, and fees on medical devices and pharmaceutical companies; there is also a tax penalty for those who do not obtain health insurance, unless they are exempt due to low income or other reasons. in march , the cbo estimated that the net effect of both laws will be a reduction in the federal deficit by  billion over the first decade.the law faced several legal challenges, primarily based on the argument that an individual mandate requiring americans to buy health insurance was unconstitutional. on june , , the supreme court ruled by a  vote in national federation of independent business v. sebelius that the mandate was constitutional under the u.s. congresss taxing authority. in burwell v. hobby lobby the court ruled that closelyheld forprofit corporations could be exempt on religious grounds under the religious freedom restoration act from regulations adopted under the aca that would have required them to pay for insurance that covered certain contraceptives. in june , the court ruled  in king v. burwell that subsidies to help individuals and families purchase health insurance were authorized for those doing so on both the federal exchange and state exchanges, not only those purchasing plans established by the state, as the statute reads.

in february and march , vice president joe biden and secretary of state hillary clinton made separate overseas trips to announce a new era in u.s. foreign relations with russia and europe, using the terms break and reset to signal major changes from the policies of the preceding administration. obama attempted to reach out to arab leaders by granting his first interview to an arab satellite tv network, al arabiya. on march , obama continued his outreach to the muslim world, releasing a new years video message to the people and government of iran. on june , , obama delivered a speech at cairo university in egypt calling for a new beginning in relations between the islamic world and the united states and promoting middle east peace. on june , , obama condemned the iranian governments actions towards protesters following irans  presidential election.in , obama ordered a drone strike in yemen which targeted and killed anwar alawlaki, an american imam suspected of being a leading alqaeda organizer. alawlaki became the first u.s. citizen to be targeted and killed by a u.s. drone strike. the department of justice released a memo justifying alawlakis death as a lawful act of war, while civil liberties advocates described it as a violation of alawlakis constitutional right to due process. the killing led to significant controversy. his teenage son and young daughter, also americans, were later killed in separate us military actions, although they were not targeted specifically.in march , obama declared that he had authorized u.s. forces to provide logistical and intelligence support to the saudis in their military intervention in yemen, establishing a joint planning cell with saudi arabia. in , the obama administration proposed a series of arms deals with saudi arabia worth  billion. obama halted the sale of guided munition technology to saudi arabia after saudi warplanes targeted a funeral in yemens capital sanaa, killing more than  people.

on february , , obama announced that combat operations in iraq would end within  months. the obama administration scheduled the withdrawal of combat troops to be completed by august , decreasing troops levels from , while leaving a transitional force of about , in iraq until the end of . on august , , the last u.s. combat brigade exited iraq. remaining troops transitioned from combat operations to counterterrorism and the training, equipping, and advising of iraqi security forces. on august , , obama announced that the united states combat mission in iraq was over. on october , , president obama announced that all u.s. troops would leave iraq in time to be home for the holidays.in june , following the capture of mosul by isil, obama sent  troops to provide support and security for u.s. personnel and the u.s. embassy in baghdad. isis continued to gain ground and to commit widespread massacres and ethnic cleansing. in august , during the sinjar massacre, obama ordered a campaign of u.s. airstrikes against isil. by the end of , , american ground troops were committed to the conflict and , sorties were flown over the battlefield, primarily by u.s. air force and navy pilots. in early , with the addition of the panther brigade of the nd airborne division the number of u.s. ground troops in iraq increased to ,, and by july americanled coalition air forces counted , sorties over the battlefield.

in his election campaign, obama called the war in iraq a dangerous distraction and that emphasis should instead be put on the war in afghanistan, the region he cites as being most likely where an attack against the united states could be launched again. early in his presidency, obama moved to bolster u.s. troop strength in afghanistan. he announced an increase in u.s. troop levels to , military personnel in february  to stabilize a deteriorating situation in afghanistan, an area he said had not received the strategic attention, direction and resources it urgently requires. he replaced the military commander in afghanistan, general david d. mckiernan, with former special forces commander lt. gen. stanley a. mcchrystal in may , indicating that mcchrystals special forces experience would facilitate the use of counterinsurgency tactics in the war. on december , , obama announced the deployment of an additional , military personnel to afghanistan and proposed to begin troop withdrawals  months from that date; this took place in july . david petraeus replaced mcchrystal in june , after mcchrystals staff criticized white house personnel in a magazine article. in february , obama said the u.s. military would reduce the troop level in afghanistan from , to , u.s. troops by february . in october , the white house announced a plan to keep u.s. forces in afghanistan indefinitely in light of the deteriorating security situation.regarding neighboring pakistan, obama called its tribal border region the greatest threat to the security of afghanistan and americans, saying that he cannot tolerate a terrorist sanctuary. in the same speech, obama claimed that the u.s. cannot succeed in afghanistan or secure our homeland unless we change our pakistan policy.

starting with information received from central intelligence agency operatives in july , the cia developed intelligence over the next several months that determined what they believed to be the hideout of osama bin laden. he was living in seclusion in a large compound in abbottabad, pakistan, a suburban area  miles  from islamabad. cia head leon panetta reported this intelligence to president obama in march . meeting with his national security advisers over the course of the next six weeks, obama rejected a plan to bomb the compound, and authorized a surgical raid to be conducted by united states navy seals. the operation took place on may , , and resulted in the shooting death of bin laden and the seizure of papers, computer drives and disks from the compound. dna testing was one of five methods used to positively identify bin ladens corpse, which was buried at sea several hours later. within minutes of the presidents announcement from washington, dc, late in the evening on may , there were spontaneous celebrations around the country as crowds gathered outside the white house, and at new york citys ground zero and times square. reaction to the announcement was positive across party lines, including from former presidents bill clinton and george w. bush.

since the spring of , secret meetings were conducted between the united states and cuba in the neutral locations of canada and vatican city. the vatican first became involved in  when pope francis advised the u.s. and cuba to exchange prisoners as a gesture of goodwill. on december , , cuban president ral castro, in a significant public moment, greeted and shook hands with obama at the nelson mandela memorial service in johannesburg.in december , after the secret meetings, it was announced that obama, with pope francis as an intermediary, had negotiated a restoration of relations with cuba, after nearly sixty years of dtente. popularly dubbed the cuban thaw, the new republic deemed the cuban thaw to be obamas finest foreign policy achievement. on july , , president obama announced that formal diplomatic relations between cuba and the united states would resume, and embassies would be opened in washington and havana. the countries respective interests sections in one anothers capitals were upgraded to embassies on july  and august , , respectively. obama visited havana, cuba for two days in march , becoming the first sitting u.s. president to arrive since calvin coolidge in .

during the initial years of the obama administration, the u.s. increased military cooperation with israel, including increased military aid, reestablishment of the u.s.israeli joint political military group and the defense policy advisory group, and an increase in visits among highlevel military officials of both countries. the obama administration asked congress to allocate money toward funding the iron dome program in response to the waves of palestinian rocket attacks on israel. in march , obama took a public stance against plans by the government of israeli prime minister benjamin netanyahu to continue building jewish housing projects in predominantly arab neighborhoods of east jerusalem. in , the united states vetoed a security council resolution condemning israeli settlements, with the united states being the only nation to do so. obama supports the twostate solution to the arabisraeli conflict based on the  borders with land swaps.in , jeffrey goldberg reported that, in obamas view, with each new settlement announcement, netanyahu is moving his country down a path toward neartotal isolation. in , obama likened the zionist movement to the civil rights movement in the united states. he said both movements seek to bring justice and equal rights to historically persecuted peoples, explaining to me, being proisrael and projewish is part and parcel with the values that ive been fighting for since i was politically conscious and started getting involved in politics. obama expressed support for israels right to defend itself during the  israelgaza conflict. in , obama was harshly criticized by israel for advocating and signing the iran nuclear deal; israeli prime minister benjamin netanyahu, who had advocated the u.s. congress to oppose it, said the deal was dangerous and bad.on december , , under the obama administration, the united states abstained from united nations security council resolution , which condemned israeli settlement building in the occupied palestinian territories as a violation of international law, effectively allowing it to pass. netanyahu strongly criticized the obama administrations actions, and the israeli government withdrew its annual dues from the organization, which totaled  million, on january , . on january , , the united states house of representatives voted  to condemn the un resolution. in  during the  israelhamas war, obama criticized israels actions and the support of the united states to it.

in february , protests in libya began against longtime dictator muammar gaddafi as part of the arab spring. they soon turned violent. in march, as forces loyal to gaddafi advanced on rebels across libya, calls for a nofly zone came from around the world, including europe, the arab league, and a resolution passed unanimously by the u.s. senate. in response to the passage of united nations security council resolution  on march , gaddafiwho had previously vowed to show no mercy to the rebels of benghaziannounced an immediate cessation of military activities.the next day, on obamas orders, the u.s. military took part in air strikes to destroy the libyan governments air defense capabilities to protect civilians and enforce a noflyzone, including the use of tomahawk missiles, b spirits, and fighter jets. six days later, on march , by unanimous vote of all its  members, nato took over leadership of the effort, dubbed operation unified protector. some representatives questioned whether obama had the constitutional authority to order military action in addition to questioning its cost, structure and aftermath. obama later expressed regret for playing a leading role in the destabilization of libya, calling the certain situation there a mess. he has stated that the lack of preparation surrounding the days following the governments overthrow was the worst mistake of his presidency.

on august , , several months after the start of the syrian civil war, obama issued a written statement that said the time has come for president assad to step aside. this stance was reaffirmed in november . in , obama authorized multiple programs run by the cia and the pentagon to train antiassad rebels. the pentagonrun program was later found to have failed and was formally abandoned in october .in the wake of a chemical weapons attack in syria, formally blamed by the obama administration on the assad government, obama chose not to enforce the red line he had pledged and, rather than authorize the promised military action against assad, went along with the russiabrokered deal that led to assad giving up chemical weapons; however attacks with chlorine gas continued. in , obama authorized an air campaign aimed primarily at isil.

on october , , the obama administration went ahead with a bush administration program, increasing nuclear weapons production. the complex modernization initiative expanded two existing nuclear sites to produce new bomb parts. the administration built new plutonium pits at the los alamos lab in new mexico and expanded enriched uranium processing at the y facility in oak ridge, tennessee. in november , the obama administration opened negotiations with iran to prevent it from acquiring nuclear weapons, which included an interim agreement. negotiations took two years with numerous delays, with a deal being announced on july , . the deal titled the joint comprehensive plan of action saw sanctions removed in exchange for measures that would prevent iran from producing nuclear weapons. while obama hailed the agreement as being a step towards a more hopeful world, the deal drew strong criticism from republican and conservative quarters, and from israeli prime minister benjamin netanyahu. in addition, the transfer of . billion in cash to iran shortly after the deal was announced was criticized by the republican party. the obama administration said that the payment in cash was because of the effectiveness of u.s. and international sanctions. in order to advance the deal, the obama administration shielded hezbollah from the drug enforcement administrations project cassandra investigation regarding drug smuggling and from the central intelligence agency.

on a side note, the very same year, in december , obama started a  billion worth program to back the biggest u.s. buildup of nuclear arms since ronald reagan left the white house.

in march , an agreement was reached with the administration of russian president dmitry medvedev to replace the  strategic arms reduction treaty with a new pact reducing the number of longrange nuclear weapons in the arsenals of both countries by about a third. obama and medvedev signed the new start treaty in april , and the u.s. senate ratified it in december . in december , obama instructed agencies to consider lgbt rights when issuing financial aid to foreign countries. in august , he criticized russias law that discriminates against gays, but he stopped short of advocating a boycott of the upcoming  winter olympics in sochi, russia.after russias invasion of crimea in , military intervention in syria in , and the interference in the  u.s. presidential election, george robertson, a former uk defense secretary and nato secretarygeneral, said obama had allowed putin to jump back on the world stage and test the resolve of the west, adding that the legacy of this disaster would last.

obamas family history, upbringing, and ivy league education differ markedly from those of africanamerican politicians who launched their careers in the s through participation in the civil rights movement. expressing puzzlement over questions about whether he is black enough, obama told an august  meeting of the national association of black journalists that were still locked in this notion that if you appeal to white folks then there must be something wrong. obama acknowledged his youthful image in an october  campaign speech, saying i wouldnt be here if, time and again, the torch had not been passed to a new generation. additionally, obama has frequently been referred to as an exceptional orator. during his preinauguration transition period and continuing into his presidency, obama delivered a series of weekly internet video addresses.

according to the gallup organization, obama began his presidency with a  percent approval rating before gradually declining for the rest of the year, and eventually bottoming out at  percent in august , a trend similar to ronald reagans and bill clintons first years in office. he experienced a small poll bounce shortly after the death of osama bin laden on may , , and maintained  percent approval for about a month, until his approval numbers dropped back to the low s. by august , obamas approval rating stood at only  percent; similar results were found in three other polls in october. his approval ratings rebounded around the same time as his reelection in , with polls showing an average job approval of  percent shortly after his second inauguration.obama saw his approval rating drop to  percent in december . in polling conducted before the  midterm elections, obamas disapproval rating reached its highest ever at  percent.  his approval rating continued to lag throughout most of  but began to reach the high s by the end of the year. according to gallup, obamas approval rating reached  percent in march , a level unseen since may . in polling conducted january , , obamas final approval rating was  percent, which placed him on par with george h. w. bush and dwight d. eisenhower, whose final gallup ratings also measured in the high s.obama has maintained relatively positive public perceptions after his presidency. in gallups retrospective approval polls of former presidents, obama garnered a  percent approval rating in  and again in , ranking him the fourth most popular president since world war ii.

polls showed strong support for obama in other countries both before and during his presidency. in a february  poll conducted in western europe and the u.s. by harris interactive for france  and the international herald tribune, obama was rated as the most respected world leader, as well as the most powerful. in a similar poll conducted by harris in may , obama was rated as the most popular world leader, as well as the one figure most people would pin their hopes on for pulling the world out of the economic downturn.on october , , the norwegian nobel committee announced that obama had won the  nobel peace prize for his extraordinary efforts to strengthen international diplomacy and cooperation between peoples, which drew a mixture of praise and criticism from world leaders and media figures. he became the fourth u.s. president to be awarded the nobel peace prize, and the third to become a nobel laureate while in office.

obamas presidency ended on january , , upon the inauguration of his successor, donald trump. the family moved to a house they rented in kalorama, washington, d.c. on march , the john f. kennedy presidential library and museum awarded the profile in courage award to obama for his enduring commitment to democratic ideals and elevating the standard of political courage. his first public appearance since leaving the office was a seminar at the university of chicago on april , where he appealed for a new generation to participate in politics. on september , obama partnered with former presidents jimmy carter, george h. w. bush, bill clinton, and george w. bush to work with one america appeal to help the victims of hurricane harvey and hurricane irma in the gulf coast and texas communities. from october  to november , obama hosted the inaugural summit of the obama foundation, which he intended to be the central focus of his postpresidency and part of his ambitions for his subsequent activities following his presidency to be more consequential than his time in office.barack and michelle obama signed a deal on may , , to produce docuseries, documentaries and features for netflix under the obamas newly formed production company, higher ground productions. higher grounds first film, american factory, won the academy award for best documentary feature in . on october , a pipe bomb addressed to obama was intercepted by the secret service. it was one of several pipebombs that had been mailed out to democratic lawmakers and officials. in , barack and michelle obama bought a home on marthas vineyard from wyc grousbeck. on october , obama criticized wokeness and callout culture at the obama foundations annual summit.obama was reluctant to make an endorsement in the  democratic presidential primaries because he wanted to position himself to unify the party, regardless of the nominee. on april , , obama endorsed biden, the presumptive nominee, for president in the presidential election, stating that he has all the qualities we need in a president right now. in may, obama criticized president trump for his handling of the covid pandemic, calling his response to the crisis an absolute chaotic disaster, and stating that the consequences of the trump presidency have been our worst impulses unleashed, our proud reputation around the world badly diminished, and our democratic institutions threatened like never before. on november , obamas presidential memoir, a promised land, was released.in february , obama and musician bruce springsteen started a podcast called renegades born in the usa where the two talk about their backgrounds, music and their enduring love of america. later that year, regina hicks had signed a deal with netflix, in a venture with his and michelles higher ground to develop comedy projects.

on march , , obama won an audio publishers association  award in the best narration by the author category for the narration of his memoir a promised land. on april , obama visited the white house for the first time since leaving office, in an event celebrating the th annual anniversary of the signing of the affordable care act. in june, it was announced that the obamas and their podcast production company, higher ground, signed a multiyear deal with audible. in september, obama visited the white house to unveil his and michelles official white house portraits. around the same time, he won a primetime emmy award for outstanding narrator for his narration in the netflix documentary series our great national parks.in , obama opposed expanding the supreme court beyond the present nine justices.in march , obama traveled to australia as a part of his speaking tour of the country. during the trip, obama met with australian prime minister anthony albanese and visited melbourne for the first time. obama was reportedly paid more than  million for two speeches.in october , during the israelhamas war, obama warned israel that its actions could harden palestinian attitudes for generations and weaken international support for israel; any military strategy that ignored the wars human costs could ultimately backfire.

historian julian zelizer credits obama with a keen sense of how the institutions of government work and the ways that his team could design policy proposals. zelizer notes obamas policy successes included the economic stimulus package which ended the great recession and the doddfrank financial and consumer protection reforms, as well as the affordable care act. zelizer also notes the democratic party lost power and numbers of elected officials during obamas term, saying that the consensus among historians is that obama turned out to be a very effective policymaker but not a tremendously successful party builder. zelizer calls this the defining paradox of obamas presidency.the brookings institution noted that obama passed only one major legislative achievement and a fragile one at thatthe legacy of obamas presidency mainly rests on its tremendous symbolic importance and the fate of a patchwork of executive actions. david w. wise noted that obama fell short in areas many progressives hold dear, including the continuation of drone strikes, not going after big banks during the great recession, and failing to strengthen his coalition before pushing for obamacare. wise called obamas legacy that of a disappointingly conventional president.obamas most significant accomplishment is generally considered to be the affordable care act , provisions of which went into effect from  to . many attempts by senate republicans to repeal the aca, including a skinny repeal, have thus far failed. however, in , the penalty for violating the individual mandate was repealed effective . together with the health care and education reconciliation act amendment, it represents the u.s. healthcare systems most significant regulatory overhaul and expansion of coverage since the passage of medicare and medicaid in .many commentators credit obama with averting a threatened depression and pulling the economy back from the great recession. according to the u.s. bureau of labor statistics, the obama administration created . million jobs from the month after his first inauguration to the end of his second term. in , obama signed into effect the doddfrank wall street reform and consumer protection act. passed as a response to the financial crisis of , it brought the most significant changes to financial regulation in the united states since the regulatory reform that followed the great depression under democratic president franklin d. roosevelt.in , obama signed into law the national defense authorization act for fiscal year , which contained in it the matthew shepard and james byrd jr. hate crimes prevention act, the first addition to existing federal hate crime law in the united states since democratic president bill clinton signed into law the church arson prevention act of . the act expanded existing federal hate crime laws in the united states, and made it a federal crime to assault people based on sexual orientation, gender identity, or disability.as president, obama advanced lgbt rights. in , he signed the dont ask, dont tell repeal act, which brought an end to dont ask, dont tell policy in the u.s. armed forces that banned open service from lgb people; the law went into effect the following year. in , his administration brought an end to the ban on transgender people serving openly in the u.s. armed forces. a gallup poll, taken in the final days of obamas term, showed that  percent of americans believed the u.s. had made progress on lgbt rights during obamas eight years in office.obama substantially escalated the use of drone strikes against suspected militants and terrorists associated with alqaeda and the taliban. in , the last year of his presidency, the u.s. dropped , bombs on seven different countries. obama left about , u.s. troops in afghanistan, , in iraq,  in syria,  in pakistan,  in somalia, seven in yemen, and two in libya at the end of his presidency.according to pew research center and united states bureau of justice statistics, from december , , to december , , inmates sentenced in u.s. federal custody declined by five percent. this is the largest decline in sentenced inmates in u.s. federal custody since democratic president jimmy carter. by contrast, the federal prison population increased significantly under presidents ronald reagan, george h. w. bush, bill clinton, and george w. bush.human rights watch  called obamas human rights record mixed, adding that he has often treated human rights as a secondary interestnice to support when the cost was not too high, but nothing like a top priority he championed.obama left office in january  with a  percent approval rating. he gained  spots from the same survey in  from the brookings institution that ranked him the thgreatest american president. in gallups  job approval poll for the past  u.s. presidents, he received a  percent approval rating.

the barack obama presidential center is obamas planned presidential library. it will be hosted by the university of chicago and located in jackson park on the south side of chicago.

death is the irreversible cessation of all biological functions that sustain an organism. for organisms with a brain, death can also be defined as the irreversible cessation of functioning of the whole brain, including the brainstem.  brain death is sometimes used as a legal definition of death. the remains of a former organism normally begins to decompose shortly after death. death is an inevitable process that eventually occurs in all organisms. some organisms, such as turritopsis dohrnii, are biologically immortal. however, they can still die from means other than aging.determining when someone has definitively died has proven difficult. initially, death was defined as occurring when breathing and the heartbeat ceased, a status still known as clinical death. however, the development of cpr no longer means it was irreversible. brain death was the next option, but several definitions exist for this. some people believe that all brain functions must cease. some believe that even if the brainstem is still alive, the personality and identity are irretrievably lost, so therefore, the person should be entirely dead.death is generally applied to whole organisms; the similar process seen in individual components of an organism, such as cells or tissues, is necrosis. something that is not considered an organism, such as a virus, can be physically destroyed but is not said to die, as a virus is not considered alive in the first place. as of the early st century,  million people die per year. the most common reason is cardiovascular disease, which is a disease that affects the heart.many cultures and religions have a concept of an afterlife that may hold the idea of judgment of good and bad deeds in ones life. there are also  different customs for honoring the body, such as a funeral, cremation, or sky burial.a study known as biogerontology seeks to eliminate death by natural aging in humans, often through the application of natural processes found in certain organisms. however, as humans do not have the means to apply this to themselves, they have to use other ways to reach the maximum lifespan for a human, such as calorie reduction, dieting, and exercise.as of , a total of  billion humans have died, or roughly . of all humans to ever live.

the concept of death is the key to human understanding of the phenomenon. there are many scientific approaches and various interpretations of the concept. additionally, the advent of lifesustaining therapy and the numerous criteria for defining death from both a medical and legal standpoint have made it difficult to create a single unifying definition.

one of the challenges in defining death is in distinguishing it from life. as a point in time, death seems to refer to the moment when life ends. determining when death has occurred is difficult, as cessation of life functions is often not simultaneous across organ systems. such determination, therefore, requires drawing precise conceptual boundaries between life and death. this is difficult due to there being little consensus on how to define life.

it is possible to define life in terms of consciousness. when consciousness ceases, an organism can be said to have died. one of the flaws in this approach is that there are many organisms that are alive but probably not conscious. another problem is in defining consciousness, which has many different definitions given by modern scientists, psychologists and philosophers. additionally, many religious traditions, including abrahamic and dharmic traditions, hold that death does not  entail the end of consciousness. in certain cultures, death is more of a process than a single event. it implies a slow shift from one spiritual state to another.other definitions for death focus on the character of cessation of organismic functioning and human death, which refers to irreversible loss of personhood. more specifically, death occurs when a living entity experiences irreversible cessation of all functioning. as it pertains to human life, death is an irreversible process where someone loses their existence as a person.

historically, attempts to define the exact moment of a humans death have been subjective or imprecise. death was defined as the cessation of heartbeat  and breathing, but the development of cpr and prompt defibrillation have rendered that definition inadequate because breathing and heartbeat can sometimes be restarted. this type of death where circulatory and respiratory arrest happens is known as the circulatory definition of death . proponents of the cdd believe this definition is reasonable because a person with permanent loss of circulatory and respiratory function should be considered dead. critics of this definition state that while cessation of these functions may be permanent, it does not mean the situation is irreversible because if cpr is applied fast enough, the person could be revived. thus, the arguments for and against the cdd boil down to defining the actual words permanent and irreversible, which further complicates the challenge of defining death. furthermore, events causally linked to death in the past no longer kill in all circumstances; without a functioning heart or lungs, life can sometimes be sustained with a combination of life support devices, organ transplants, and artificial pacemakers.

today, where a definition of the moment of death is required, doctors and coroners usually turn to brain death or biological death to define a person as being dead; people are considered dead when the electrical activity in their brain ceases. it is presumed that an end of electrical activity indicates the end of consciousness. suspension of consciousness must be permanent and not transient, as occurs during certain sleep stages, and especially a coma. in the case of sleep, electroencephalogram  are used to tell the difference.the category of brain death is seen as problematic by some scholars. for instance, dr. franklin miller, a senior faculty member at the department of bioethics, national institutes of health, notes by the late s... the equation of brain death with death of the human being was increasingly challenged by scholars, based on evidence regarding the array of biological functioning displayed by patients correctly diagnosed as having this condition who were maintained on mechanical ventilation for substantial periods of time. these patients maintained the ability to sustain circulation and respiration, control temperature, excrete wastes, heal wounds, fight infections and, most dramatically, to gestate fetuses .

while brain death is viewed as problematic by some scholars, there are proponents of it that believe this definition of death is the most reasonable for distinguishing life from death. the reasoning behind the support for this definition is that brain death has a set of criteria that is reliable and reproducible. also, the brain is crucial in determining our identity or who we are as human beings. the distinction should be made that brain death cannot be equated with one in a vegetative state or coma, in that the former situation describes a state that is beyond recovery.eegs can detect spurious electrical impulses, while certain drugs, hypoglycemia, hypoxia, or hypothermia can suppress or even stop brain activity temporarily; because of this, hospitals have protocols for determining brain death involving eegs at widely separated intervals under defined conditions.

people maintaining that only the neocortex of the brain is necessary for consciousness sometimes argue that only electrical activity should be considered when defining death. eventually, the criterion for death may be the permanent and irreversible loss of cognitive function, as evidenced by the death of the cerebral cortex. all hope of recovering human thought and personality is then gone, given current and foreseeable medical technology. even by wholebrain criteria, the determination of brain death can be complicated.

at present, in most places, the more conservative definition of death has been adopted. one example is the uniform determination of death act in the united states. in the past, the adoption of this wholebrain definition was a conclusion of the presidents commission for the study of ethical problems in medicine and biomedical and behavioral research in . they concluded that this approach to defining death sufficed in reaching a uniform definition nationwide. a multitude of reasons was presented to support this definition, including uniformity of standards in law for establishing death, consumption of a familys fiscal resources for artificial life support, and legal establishment for equating brain death with death to proceed with organ donation.

aside from the issue of support of or dispute against brain death, there is another inherent problem in this categorical definition the variability of its application in medical practice. in , the american academy of neurology  established the criteria that became the medical standard for diagnosing neurologic death. at that time, three clinical features had to be satisfied to determine irreversible cessation of the total brain, including coma with clear etiology, cessation of breathing, and lack of brainstem reflexes. this criteria was updated again, most recently in , but substantial discrepancies remain across hospitals and medical specialties.

the problem of defining death is especially imperative as it pertains to the dead donor rule, which could be understood as one of the following interpretations of the rule there must be an official declaration of death in a person before starting organ procurement, or that organ procurement cannot result in the death of the donor. a great deal of controversy has surrounded the definition of death and the dead donor rule. advocates of the rule believe that the rule is legitimate in protecting organ donors while also countering any moral or legal objection to organ procurement. critics, on the other hand, believe that the rule does not uphold the best interests of the donors and that the rule does not effectively promote organ donation.

signs of death or strong indications that a warmblooded animal is no longer alive are

respiratory arrest 

cardiac arrest 

brain death the stages that follow after death are

pallor mortis, paleness which happens in  minutes after death

algor mortis, the reduction in body temperature following death. this is generally a steady decline until matching ambient temperature

rigor mortis, the limbs of the corpse become stiff  and difficult to move or manipulate

livor mortis, a settling of the blood in the lower  portion of the body

putrefaction, the beginning signs of decomposition

decomposition, the reduction into simpler forms of matter, accompanied by a strong, unpleasant odor.

skeletonization, the end of decomposition, where all soft tissues have decomposed, leaving only the skeleton.

fossilization, the natural preservation of the skeletal remains formed over a very long period

the death of a person has legal consequences that may vary between jurisdictions. most countries follow the wholebrain death criteria, where all functions of the brain must have completely ceased. however, in other jurisdictions, some follow the brainstem version of brain death. afterward, a death certificate is issued in most jurisdictions, either by a doctor or by an administrative office, upon presentation of a doctors declaration of death.

there are many anecdotal references to people being declared dead by physicians and then coming back to life, sometimes days later in their coffin or when embalming procedures are about to begin. from the midth century onwards, there was an upsurge in the publics fear of being mistakenly buried alive and much debate about the uncertainty of the signs of death. various suggestions were made to test for signs of life before burial, ranging from pouring vinegar and pepper into the corpses mouth to applying red hot pokers to the feet or into the rectum. writing in , the physician j.c. ouseley claimed that as many as , people were buried prematurely each year in england and wales, although some estimates peg the figure to be closer to .in cases of electric shock, cardiopulmonary resuscitation  for an hour or longer can allow stunned nerves to recover, allowing an apparently dead person to survive. people found unconscious under icy water may survive if their faces are kept continuously cold until they arrive at an emergency room. this diving response, in which metabolic activity and oxygen requirements are minimal, is something humans share with cetaceans called the mammalian diving reflex.as medical technologies advance, ideas about when death occurs may have to be reevaluated in light of the ability to restore a person to vitality after longer periods of apparent death . the lack of electrical brain activity may not be enough to consider someone scientifically dead. therefore, the concept of informationtheoretic death has been suggested as a better means of defining when true death occurs, though the concept has few practical applications outside the field of cryonics.

the leading cause of human death in developing countries is infectious disease. the leading causes in developed countries are atherosclerosis , cancer, and other diseases related to obesity and aging. by an extremely wide margin, the largest unifying cause of death in the developed world is biological aging, leading to various complications known as agingassociated diseases. these conditions cause loss of homeostasis, leading to cardiac arrest, causing loss of oxygen and nutrient supply, causing irreversible deterioration of the brain and other tissues. of the roughly , people who die each day across the globe, about two thirds die of agerelated causes. in industrialized nations, the proportion is much higher, approaching . with improved medical capability, dying has become a condition to be managed.

in developing nations, inferior sanitary conditions and lack of access to modern medical technology make death from infectious diseases more common than in developed countries. one such disease is tuberculosis, a bacterial disease that killed . million people in . malaria causes about  million cases of fever and m deaths annually. the aids death toll in africa may reach  million by .according to jean ziegler, the united nations special reporter on the right to food,   mar , mortality due to malnutrition accounted for  of the total mortality rate in . ziegler says worldwide, approximately  million people died from all causes and of those deaths, more than  million died of hunger or diseases due to deficiencies in micronutrients.

tobacco smoking killed  million people worldwide in the th century and could kill  billion people worldwide in the st century, a world health organization report warned.many leading developed world causes of death can be postponed by diet and physical activity, but the accelerating incidence of disease with age still imposes limits on human longevity. the evolutionary cause of aging is, at best, only beginning to be understood. it has been suggested that direct intervention in the aging process may now be the most effective intervention against major causes of death.selye proposed a unified nonspecific approach to many causes of death. he demonstrated that stress decreases the adaptability of an organism and proposed to describe adaptability as a special resource, adaptation energy. the animal dies when this resource is exhausted. selye assumed that adaptability is a finite supply presented at birth. later, goldstone proposed the concept of production or income of adaptation energy which may be stored  as a capital reserve of adaptation. in recent works, adaptation energy is considered an internal coordinate on the dominant path in the model of adaptation. it is demonstrated that oscillations of wellbeing appear when the reserve of adaptability is almost exhausted.

in , suicide overtook car crashes as the leading cause of human injury deaths in the u.s., followed by poisoning, falls, and murder.accidents and disasters, from nuclear disasters to structural collapses, also claim lives. one of the deadliest incidents of all time is the failure of the  banqiao dam failure, with varying estimates, up to , dead. other incidents with high death tolls are; the wanggongchang explosion when a gunpowder factory ended up with , deaths, a collapse of a wall of circus maximus killing , people, and the chernobyl disaster killing between  and , people.natural disasters kill around , people annually, although this number can vary to millions to thousands on a per decade basis. some of the deadliest natural disasters are the  china floods, which killed and estimated  million people, although, estimates widely vary, the  yellow river flood, which killed an estimated  million people in china, and the  bhola cyclone, killing , people in pakistan.in animals, predation can be a common cause of death. livestock have a  death rate from predation. however, younger animals are more susceptible to predation. for example,  of young foxes die to birds, bobcats, coyotes, and other foxes as well. young bear cubs in the yellowstone national park only have a  chance to survive to adulthood from other bears and predators.

an autopsy, also known as a postmortem examination or an obduction, is a medical procedure that consists of a thorough examination of a human corpse to determine the cause and manner of a persons death and to evaluate any disease or injury that may be present. it is usually performed by a specialized medical doctor called a pathologist.autopsies are either performed for legal or medical purposes. a forensic autopsy is carried out when the cause of death may be a criminal matter, while a clinical or academic autopsy is performed to find the medical cause of death and is used in cases of unknown or uncertain death, or for research purposes. autopsies can be further classified into cases where external examination suffices, and those where the body is dissected and an internal examination is conducted. permission from next of kin may be required for internal autopsy in some cases. once an internal autopsy is complete the body is generally reconstituted by sewing it back together.a necropsy, which is not always a medical procedure, was a term previously used to describe an unregulated postmortem examination. in modern times, this term is more commonly associated with the corpses of animals.

death before birth can happen in several ways stillbirth, when the fetus dies before or during the delivery process; miscarriage, when the embryo dies before independent survival; and abortion, the artificial termination of the pregnancy. stillbirth and miscarriage can happen for various reasons, while abortion is carried out purposely.

stillbirth can happen right before or after the delivery of a fetus. it can result from defects of the fetus or risk factors present in the mother. reductions of these factors, caesarean sections when risks are present, and early detection of birth defects have lowered the rate of stillbirth. however,  of births in the united states end in a stillbirth.

a miscarriage is defined by the world health organization as, the expulsion or extraction from its mother of an embryo or fetus weighing g or less. miscarriage is one of the most frequent problems in pregnancy, and is reported in around  of all clinical pregnancies; however, by including pregnancy losses during menstruation, it could be up to  of all pregnancies. there are many riskfactors involved in miscarriage; consumption of caffeine, tobacco, alcohol, drugs, having a previous miscarriage, and the use of abortion can increase the chances of having a miscarriage.

an abortion may be performed for many reasons, such as pregnancy from rape, financial constraints of having a child, teenage pregnancy, and the lack of support from a significant other. there are two forms of abortion a medical abortion and an inclinic abortion or sometimes referred to as a surgical abortion. a medical abortion involves taking a pill that will terminate the pregnancy no more than  weeks past the last period, and an inclinic abortion involves a medical procedure using suction to empty the uterus; this is possible after  weeks, but it may be more difficult to find an operating doctor who will go through with the procedure.

senescence refers to a scenario when a living being can survive all calamities but eventually dies due to causes relating to old age. conversely, premature death can refer to a death that occurs before old age arrives, for example, human death before a person reaches the age of . animal and plant cells normally reproduce and function during the whole period of natural existence, but the aging process derives from the deterioration of cellular activity and the ruination of regular functioning. the aptitude of cells for gradual deterioration and mortality means that cells are naturally sentenced to stable and longterm loss of living capacities, even despite continuing metabolic reactions and viability. in the united kingdom, for example, nine out of ten of all the deaths that occur daily relates to senescence, while around the world, it accounts for twothirds of , deaths that take place daily.almost all animals who survive external hazards to their biological functioning eventually die from biological aging, known in life sciences as senescence. some organisms experience negligible senescence, even exhibiting biological immortality. these include the jellyfish turritopsis dohrnii, the hydra, and the planarian. unnatural causes of death include suicide and predation. of all causes, roughly , people die around the world each day. of these, twothirds die directly or indirectly due to senescence, but in industrialized countries  such as the united states, the united kingdom, and germany  the rate approaches  .physiological death is now seen as a process, more than an event conditions once considered indicative of death are now reversible. where in the process, a dividing line is drawn between life and death depends on factors beyond the presence or absence of vital signs. in general, clinical death is neither necessary nor sufficient for a determination of legal death. a patient with working heart and lungs determined to be brain dead can be pronounced legally dead without clinical death occurring.

life extension refers to an increase in maximum or average lifespan, especially in humans, by slowing down or reversing the processes of aging through antiaging measures. although aging is the most common cause of death worldwide, it is socially mostly ignored as such and seen as necessary and inevitable anyway, which is why little money is spent on research into antiaging therapies, a phenomenon known as proaging trance.the average lifespan is determined by vulnerability to accidents and age or lifestylerelated afflictions such as cancer or cardiovascular disease. extension of average lifespan can be achieved by good diet, exercise, and avoidance of hazards such as smoking. maximum lifespan is also determined by the rate of aging for a species inherent in its genes. currently, the only widely recognized method of extending the maximum lifespan is calorie restriction. theoretically, the extension of the maximum lifespan can be achieved by reducing the rate of aging damage, by periodic replacement of damaged tissues, or by molecular repair or rejuvenation of deteriorated cells and tissues.a united states poll found that religious people and irreligious people, as well as men and women and people of different economic classes, have similar rates of support for life extension, while africans and hispanics have higher rates of support than white people. thirtyeight percent of the polled said they would desire to have their aging process cured.researchers of life extension are a subclass of biogerontologists known as biomedical gerontologists. they try to understand the nature of aging, and they develop treatments to reverse aging processes or at least slow them down for the improvement of health and the maintenance of youthful vigor at every stage of life. those who take advantage of life extension findings and seek to apply them to themselves are called life extensionists or longevists. the primary life extension strategy currently is to apply available antiaging methods in the hope of living long enough to benefit from a complete cure for aging once it is developed.

cryonics  is the lowtemperature preservation of animals and humans who cannot be sustained by contemporary medicine, with the hope that healing and resuscitation may be possible in the future.cryopreservation of people or large animals is not reversible with current technology. the stated rationale for cryonics is that people who are considered dead by current legal or medical definitions may not necessarily be dead according to the more stringent informationtheoretic definition of death.some scientific literature is claimed to support the feasibility of cryonics. medical science and cryobiologists generally regard cryonics with skepticism.

around , most people in western countries died in their own homes, surrounded by family, and comforted by clergy, neighbors, and doctors making house calls. by the midth century, half of all americans died in a hospital. by the start of the st century, only about  to  of people in developed countries died outside of a medical institution. the shift from dying at home towards dying in a professional medical environment has been termed the invisible death. this shift occurred gradually over the years until most deaths now occur outside the home.

death studies is a field within psychology. to varying degrees people inherently fear death, both the process and the eventuality; it is hard wired and part of the survival instinct of all animals. discussing, thinking about, or planning for their deaths causes them discomfort. this fear may cause them to put off financial planning, preparing a will and testament, or requesting help from a hospice organization.

mortality salience is the awareness that death is inevitable. however, selfesteem and culture are ways to reduce the anxiety this effect can cause. the awareness of someones own death can cause a deepened bond in their ingroup as a defense mechanism. this can also cause the person to become very judging. in a study, two groups were formed; one group was asked to reflect upon their mortality, the other was not, afterwards, the groups were told to set a bond for a prostitute. the group that did not reflect on death had an average of , the group who was reminded about their death had an average of  dollars.different people have different responses to the idea of their deaths. philosopher galen strawson writes that the death that many people wish for is an instant, painless, unexperienced annihilation. in this unlikely scenario, the person dies without realizing it and without being able to fear it. one moment the person is walking, eating, or sleeping, and the next moment, the person is dead. strawson reasons that this type of death would not take anything away from the person, as he believes a person cannot have a legitimate claim to ownership in the future.

in society, the nature of death and humanitys awareness of its mortality has, for millennia, been a concern of the worlds religious traditions and philosophical inquiry. including belief in resurrection or an afterlife , reincarnation or rebirth , or that consciousness permanently ceases to exist, known as eternal oblivion .commemoration ceremonies after death may include various mourning, funeral practices, and ceremonies of honoring the deceased. the physical remains of a person, commonly known as a corpse or body, are usually interred whole or cremated, though among the worlds cultures, there are a variety of other methods of mortuary disposal. in the english language, blessings directed towards a dead person include rest in peace  or its initialism rip.

death is the center of many traditions and organizations; customs relating to death are a feature of every culture around the world. much of this revolves around the care of the dead, as well as the afterlife and the disposal of bodies upon the onset of death. the disposal of human corpses does, in general, begin with the last offices before significant time has passed, and ritualistic ceremonies often occur, most commonly interment or cremation. this is not a unified practice; in tibet, for instance, the body is given a sky burial and left on a mountain top. proper preparation for death and techniques and ceremonies for producing the ability to transfer ones spiritual attainments into another body  are subjects of detailed study in tibet. mummification or embalming is also prevalent in some cultures to retard the rate of decay.some parts of death in culture are legally based, having laws for when death occurs, such as the receiving of a death certificate, the settlement of the deceased estate, and the issues of inheritance and, in some countries, inheritance taxation.capital punishment is also a culturally divisive aspect of death. in most jurisdictions where capital punishment is carried out today, the death penalty is reserved for premeditated murder, espionage, treason, or as part of military justice. in some countries, sexual crimes, such as adultery and sodomy, carry the death penalty, as do religious crimes, such as apostasy, the formal renunciation of ones religion. in many retentionist countries, drug trafficking is also a capital offense. in china, human trafficking and serious cases of corruption are also punished by the death penalty. in militaries around the world, courtsmartial have imposed death sentences for offenses such as cowardice, desertion, insubordination, and mutiny.death in warfare and suicide attack also have cultural links, and the ideas of dulce et decorum est pro patria mori, which translates to it is sweet and proper to die for ones country, mutiny punishable by death, such as in the united states, grieving relatives of dead soldiers and death notification are embedded in many cultures. recently in the western world, with the increase in terrorism following the september  attacks, but also further back in time with suicide bombings, kamikaze missions in world war ii, and suicide missions in a host of other conflicts in history, death for a cause by way of suicide attack, and martyrdom have had significant cultural impacts.suicide, in general, and particularly euthanasia, are also points of cultural debate. both acts are understood very differently in different cultures. in japan, for example, ending a life with honor by seppuku was considered a desirable death, whereas according to traditional christian and islamic cultures, suicide is viewed as a sin.

death is personified in many cultures, with such symbolic representations as the grim reaper, azrael, the hindu god yama, and father time. in the west, the grim reaper, or figures similar to it, is the most popular depiction of death in western cultures.in brazil, death is counted officially when it is registered by existing family members at a cartrio, a governmentauthorized registry. before being able to file for an official death, the deceased must have been registered for an official birth at the cartrio. though a public registry law guarantees all brazilian citizens the right to register deaths, regardless of their financial means of their family members , the brazilian government has not taken away the burden, the hidden costs, and fees of filing for a death. for many impoverished families, the indirect costs and burden of filing for a death lead to a more appealing, unofficial, local, and cultural burial, which, in turn, raises the debate about inaccurate mortality rates.talking about death and witnessing it is a difficult issue in most cultures. western societies may like to treat the dead with the utmost material respect, with an official embalmer and associated rites. eastern societies  may be more open to accepting it as a fait accompli, with a funeral procession of the dead body ending in an openair burningtoashes.

the origin of death is a theme or myth of how death came to be. it is present in nearly all cultures across the world, as death is a universal happening. this makes it an origin myth, a myth that describes how a feature of the natural or social world appeared. there can be some similarities between myths and cultures. in north american mythology, the theme of a man who wants to be immortal and a man who wants to die can be seen across many indigenous people. in christianity, death is the result of the fall of man after eating the fruit from the tree of the knowledge of good and evil. in greek mythology, the opening of pandoras box releases death upon the world.

much interest and debate surround the question of what happens to ones consciousness as ones body dies. the belief in the permanent loss of consciousness after death is often called eternal oblivion. the belief that the stream of consciousness is preserved after physical death is described by the term afterlife. neither is likely to be confirmed without the ponderer having to die.

neardeath experiences are the closest thing people have to an afterlife that we know. some people who have had neardeath experiences  report that they have seen the afterlife while they were dead. seeing a being of light and talking with it, life flashing before the eyes, and the confirmation of cultural beliefs of the afterlife are all themes that happen during the moments they are dead.

after death, the remains of a former organism become part of the biogeochemical cycle, during which animals may be consumed by a predator or a scavenger. organic material may then be further decomposed by detritivores, organisms that recycle detritus, returning it to the environment for reuse in the food chain, where these chemicals may eventually end up being consumed and assimilated into the cells of an organism. examples of detritivores include earthworms, woodlice, and millipedes.microorganisms also play a vital role, raising the temperature of the decomposing matter as they break it down into yet simpler molecules. not all materials need to be fully decomposed. coal, a fossil fuel formed over vast tracts of time in swamp ecosystems, is one example.

the contemporary evolutionary theory sees death as an important part of the process of natural selection. it is considered that organisms less adapted to their environment are more likely to die, having produced fewer offspring, thereby reducing their contribution to the gene pool. their genes are thus eventually bred out of a population, leading at worst to extinction and, more positively, making the process possible, referred to as speciation. frequency of reproduction plays an equally important role in determining species survival an organism that dies young but leaves numerous offspring displays, according to darwinian criteria, much greater fitness than a longlived organism leaving only one.death also has a role in competition, where if a species outcompetes another, there is a risk of death for the population. especially in the case where they are directly fighting over resources.

death plays a role in extinction, the cessation of existence of a species or group of taxa, reducing biodiversity, due to extinction being generally considered to be the death of the last individual of that species . because a species potential range may be very large, determining this moment is difficult, and is usually done retrospectively.

inquiry into the evolution of aging aims to explain why so many living things and the vast majority of animals weaken and die with age. however, there are exceptions, such as hydra and the jellyfish turritopsis dohrnii, which research shows to be biologically immortal.organisms showing only asexual reproduction, such as bacteria, some protists, like the euglenoids and many amoebozoans, and unicellular organisms with sexual reproduction, colonial or not, like the volvocine algae pandorina and chlamydomonas, are immortal at some extent, dying only due to external hazards, like being eaten or meeting with a fatal accident. in multicellular organisms and also in multinucleate ciliates with a weismannist development, that is, with a division of labor between mortal somatic  cells and immortal germ  cells, death becomes an essential part of life, at least for the somatic line.the volvox algae are among the simplest organisms to exhibit that division of labor between two completely different cell types, and as a consequence, include the death of somatic line as a regular, genetically regulated part of its life history.

animals have sometimes shown grief for their partners or friends. when two chimpanzees form a bond together, sexual or not, and one of them dies, the surviving chimpanzee will show signs of grief, ripping out their hair in anger and starting to cry; if the body is removed, they will resist, they will eventually go quiet when the body is gone, but upon seeing the body again, the chimp will return to a violent state.

some nonliving things can be considered dead. for example, a volcano, batteries, electrical components, and stars are all nonliving things that can die, whether from destruction or cessation of function.

a volcano, a break in the earths crust that allows lava, ash, and gases to escape, has three states that it may be in, active, dormant, and extinct. an active volcano has recently or is currently erupting; in a dormant volcano, it has not erupted for a significant amount of time, but it may erupt again; in an extinct volcano, it may be cut off from the supply of its lava and will never expected to erupt again, so the volcano can be considered to be dead.a battery can be considered dead after the charge is fully used up. electrical components are similar in this fashion, in the case that it may not be able to be used again,  such as after a spill of water on the components, the component can be considered dead.

stars also have a lifespan and, therefore, can die. after it starts to run out of fuel, it starts to expand, this can be analogous to the star aging. after it exhausts all fuel, it may explode in a supernova, collapse into a black hole, or turn into a neutron star.

in buddhist doctrine and practice, death plays an important role. awareness of death motivated prince siddhartha to strive to find the deathless and finally attain enlightenment. in buddhist doctrine, death functions as a reminder of the value of having been born as a human being. being reborn as a human being is considered the only state in which one can attain enlightenment. therefore, death helps remind oneself that one should not take life for granted. the belief in rebirth among buddhists does not necessarily remove death anxiety since all existence in the cycle of rebirth is considered filled with suffering, and being reborn many times does not necessarily mean that one progresses.death is part of several key buddhist tenets, such as the four noble truths and dependent origination.

while there are different sects of christianity with different branches of belief, the overarching ideology on death grows from the knowledge of the afterlife. after death, the individual will undergo a separation from mortality to immortality; their soul leaves the body entering a realm of spirits. following this separation of body and spirit , resurrection will occur. representing the same transformation jesus christ embodied after his body was placed in the tomb for three days, each persons body will be resurrected, reuniting the spirit and body in a perfect form. this process allows the individuals soul to withstand death and transform into life after death.

in hindu texts, death is described as the individual eternal spiritual jivaatma  exiting the current temporary material body. the soul exits this body when the body can no longer sustain the conscious self , which may be due to mental or physical reasons or, more accurately, the inability to act on ones kama . during conception, the soul enters a compatible new body based on the remaining merits and demerits of ones karma  and the state of ones mind  at the time of death.usually, the process of reincarnation makes one forget all memories of ones previous life. because nothing really dies and the temporary material body is always changing, both in this life and the next, death means forgetfulness of ones previous experiences.

the islamic view is that death is the separation of the soul from the body as well as the beginning of the afterlife. the afterlife, or akhirah, is one of the six main beliefs in islam. rather than seeing death as the end of life, muslims consider death as a continuation of life in another form. in islam, life on earth right now is a short, temporary life and a testing period for every soul. true life begins with the day of judgement when all people will be divided into two groups. the righteous believers will be welcomed to janna , and the disbelievers and evildoers will be punished in jahannam .muslims believe death to be wholly natural and predetermined by god. only god knows the exact time of a persons death. the quran emphasizes that death is inevitable, no matter how much people try to escape death, it will reach everyone.  life on earth is the one and only chance for people to prepare themselves for the life to come and choose to either believe or not believe in god, and death is the end of that learning opportunity.

there are a variety of beliefs about the afterlife within judaism, but none of them contradict the preference for life over death. this is partially because death puts a cessation to the possibility of fulfilling any commandments.

the word death comes from old english da, which in turn comes from protogermanic dauuz . this comes from the protoindoeuropean stem dheu meaning the process, act, condition of dying.the concept and symptoms of death, and varying degrees of delicacy used in discussion in public forums, have generated numerous scientific, legal, and socially acceptable terms or euphemisms. when a person has died, it is also said they have passed away, passed on, expired, or gone, among other socially accepted, religiously specific, slang, and irreverent terms.

as a formal reference to a dead person, it has become common practice to use the participle form of decease, as in the deceased; another noun form is decedent.

bereft of life, the dead person is a corpse, cadaver, body, set of remains or, when all flesh is gone, a skeleton. the terms carrion and carcass are also used, usually for dead nonhuman animals. the ashes left after a cremation are lately called cremains.

william shakespeare  was an english playwright, poet and actor. he is widely regarded as the greatest writer in the english language and the worlds preeminent dramatist. he is often called englands national poet and the bard of avon . his extant works, including collaborations, consist of some  plays,  sonnets, three long narrative poems, and a few other verses, some of uncertain authorship. his plays have been translated into every major living language and are performed more often than those of any other playwright. shakespeare remains arguably the most influential writer in the english language, and his works continue to be studied and reinterpreted.

shakespeare was born and raised in stratforduponavon, warwickshire. at the age of , he married anne hathaway, with whom he had three children susanna, and twins hamnet and judith. sometime between  and , he began a successful career in london as an actor, writer, and partowner  of a playing company called the lord chamberlains men, later known as the kings men. at age  , he appears to have retired to stratford, where he died three years later. few records of shakespeares private life survive; this has stimulated considerable speculation about such matters as his physical appearance, his sexuality, his religious beliefs and whether the works attributed to him were written by others.shakespeare produced most of his known works between  and . his early plays were primarily comedies and histories and are regarded as some of the best works produced in these genres. he then wrote mainly tragedies until , among them hamlet, romeo and juliet, othello, king lear, and macbeth, all considered to be among the finest works in the english language. in the last phase of his life, he wrote tragicomedies  and collaborated with other playwrights.

many of shakespeares plays were published in editions of varying quality and accuracy during his lifetime. however, in , john heminges and henry condell, two fellow actors and friends of shakespeares, published a more definitive text known as the first folio, a posthumous collected edition of shakespeares dramatic works that includes  of his plays. its preface was a prescient poem by ben jonson, a former rival of shakespeare, that hailed shakespeare with the now famous epithet not of an age, but for all time.

shakespeare was the son of john shakespeare, an alderman and a successful glover  originally from snitterfield in warwickshire, and mary arden, the daughter of an affluent landowning family. he was born in stratforduponavon, where he was baptised on  april . his date of birth is unknown, but is traditionally observed on  april, saint georges day. this date, which can be traced to william oldys and george steevens, has proved appealing to biographers because shakespeare died on the same date in . he was the third of eight children, and the eldest surviving son.although no attendance records for the period survive, most biographers agree that shakespeare was probably educated at the kings new school in stratford, a free school chartered in , about a quartermile  from his home. grammar schools varied in quality during the elizabethan era, but grammar school curricula were largely similar the basic latin text was standardised by royal decree, and the school would have provided an intensive education in grammar based upon latin classical authors.at the age of , shakespeare married yearold anne hathaway. the consistory court of the diocese of worcester issued a marriage licence on  november . the next day, two of hathaways neighbours posted bonds guaranteeing that no lawful claims impeded the marriage. the ceremony may have been arranged in some haste since the worcester chancellor allowed the marriage banns to be read once instead of the usual three times, and six months after the marriage anne gave birth to a daughter, susanna, baptised  may . twins, son hamnet and daughter judith, followed almost two years later and were baptised  february . hamnet died of unknown causes at the age of  and was buried  august .

after the birth of the twins, shakespeare left few historical traces until he is mentioned as part of the london theatre scene in . the exception is the appearance of his name in the complaints bill of a law case before the queens bench court at westminster dated michaelmas term  and  october . scholars refer to the years between  and  as shakespeares lost years. biographers attempting to account for this period have reported many apocryphal stories. nicholas rowe, shakespeares first biographer, recounted a stratford legend that shakespeare fled the town for london to escape prosecution for deer poaching in the estate of local squire thomas lucy. shakespeare is also supposed to have taken his revenge on lucy by writing a scurrilous ballad about him. another thcentury story has shakespeare starting his theatrical career minding the horses of theatre patrons in london. john aubrey reported that shakespeare had been a country schoolmaster. some thcentury scholars suggested that shakespeare may have been employed as a schoolmaster by alexander hoghton of lancashire, a catholic landowner who named a certain william shakeshafte in his will. little evidence substantiates such stories other than hearsay collected after his death, and shakeshafte was a common name in the lancashire area.

it is not known definitively when shakespeare began writing, but contemporary allusions and records of performances show that several of his plays were on the london stage by . by then, he was sufficiently known in london to be attacked in print by the playwright robert greene in his groatsworth of wit from that year

... there is an upstart crow, beautified with our feathers, that with his tigers heart wrapped in a players hide, supposes he is as well able to bombast out a blank verse as the best of you and being an absolute johannes factotum, is in his own conceit the only shakescene in a country.

scholars differ on the exact meaning of greenes words, but most agree that greene was accusing shakespeare of reaching above his rank in trying to match such universityeducated writers as christopher marlowe, thomas nashe, and greene himself . the italicised phrase parodying the line oh, tigers heart wrapped in a womans hide from shakespeares henry vi, part , along with the pun shakescene, clearly identify shakespeare as greenes target. as used here, johannes factotum  refers to a secondrate tinkerer with the work of others, rather than the more common universal genius.greenes attack is the earliest surviving mention of shakespeares work in the theatre. biographers suggest that his career may have begun any time from the mids to just before greenes remarks. after , shakespeares plays were performed only by the lord chamberlains men, a company owned by a group of players, including shakespeare, that soon became the leading playing company in london. after the death of queen elizabeth in , the company was awarded a royal patent by the new king james i, and changed its name to the kings men.

in , a partnership of members of the company built their own theatre on the south bank of the river thames, which they named the globe. in , the partnership also took over the blackfriars indoor theatre. extant records of shakespeares property purchases and investments indicate that his association with the company made him a wealthy man, and in , he bought the secondlargest house in stratford, new place, and in , invested in a share of the parish tithes in stratford.some of shakespeares plays were published in quarto editions, beginning in , and by , his name had become a selling point and began to appear on the title pages. shakespeare continued to act in his own and other plays after his success as a playwright. the  edition of ben jonsons works names him on the cast lists for every man in his humour  and sejanus his fall . the absence of his name from the  cast list for jonsons volpone is taken by some scholars as a sign that his acting career was nearing its end. the first folio of , however, lists shakespeare as one of the principal actors in all these plays, some of which were first staged after volpone, although one cannot know for certain which roles he played. in , john davies of hereford wrote that good will played kingly roles. in , rowe passed down a tradition that shakespeare played the ghost of hamlets father. later traditions maintain that he also played adam in as you like it, and the chorus in henry v, though scholars doubt the sources of that information.throughout his career, shakespeare divided his time between london and stratford. in , the year before he bought new place as his family home in stratford, shakespeare was living in the parish of st helens, bishopsgate, north of the river thames. he moved across the river to southwark by , the same year his company constructed the globe theatre there. by , he had moved north of the river again, to an area north of st pauls cathedral with many fine houses. there, he rented rooms from a french huguenot named christopher mountjoy, a maker of womens wigs and other headgear.

nicholas rowe was the first biographer to record the tradition, repeated by samuel johnson, that shakespeare retired to stratford some years before his death. he was still working as an actor in london in ; in an answer to the sharers petition in , cuthbert burbage stated that after purchasing the lease of the blackfriars theatre in  from henry evans, the kings men placed men players there, which were heminges, condell, shakespeare, etc.. however, it is perhaps relevant that the bubonic plague raged in london throughout . the london public playhouses were repeatedly closed during extended outbreaks of the plague , which meant there was often no acting work. retirement from all work was uncommon at that time. shakespeare continued to visit london during the years . in , he was called as a witness in bellott v mountjoy, a court case concerning the marriage settlement of mountjoys daughter, mary. in march , he bought a gatehouse in the former blackfriars priory; and from november , he was in london for several weeks with his soninlaw, john hall. after , shakespeare wrote fewer plays, and none are attributed to him after . his last three plays were collaborations, probably with john fletcher, who succeeded him as the house playwright of the kings men. he retired in , before the globe theatre burned down during the performance of henry viii on  june.shakespeare died on  april , at the age of . he died within a month of signing his will, a document which he begins by describing himself as being in perfect health. no extant contemporary source explains how or why he died. half a century later, john ward, the vicar of stratford, wrote in his notebook shakespeare, drayton, and ben jonson had a merry meeting and, it seems, drank too hard, for shakespeare died of a fever there contracted, not an impossible scenario since shakespeare knew jonson and drayton. of the tributes from fellow authors, one refers to his relatively sudden death we wondered, shakespeare, that thou wentst so soon / from the worlds stage to the graves tiring room.

he was survived by his wife and two daughters. susanna had married a physician, john hall, in , and judith had married thomas quiney, a vintner, two months before shakespeares death. shakespeare signed his last will and testament on  march ; the following day, his new soninlaw, thomas quiney was found guilty of fathering an illegitimate son by margaret wheeler, who had died during childbirth. thomas was ordered by the church court to do public penance, which would have caused much shame and embarrassment for the shakespeare family.shakespeare bequeathed the bulk of his large estate to his elder daughter susanna under stipulations that she pass it down intact to the first son of her body. the quineys had three children, all of whom died without marrying. the halls had one child, elizabeth, who married twice but died without children in , ending shakespeares direct line. shakespeares will scarcely mentions his wife, anne, who was probably entitled to onethird of his estate automatically. he did make a point, however, of leaving her my second best bed, a bequest that has led to much speculation. some scholars see the bequest as an insult to anne, whereas others believe that the secondbest bed would have been the matrimonial bed and therefore rich in significance.

shakespeare was buried in the chancel of the holy trinity church two days after his death. the epitaph carved into the stone slab covering his grave includes a curse against moving his bones, which was carefully avoided during restoration of the church in 

some time before , a funerary monument was erected in his memory on the north wall, with a halfeffigy of him in the act of writing. its plaque compares him to nestor, socrates, and virgil. in , in conjunction with the publication of the first folio, the droeshout engraving was published. shakespeare has been commemorated in many statues and memorials around the world, including funeral monuments in southwark cathedral and poets corner in westminster abbey.

most playwrights of the period typically collaborated with others at some point, as critics agree shakespeare did, mostly early and late in his career.the first recorded works of shakespeare are richard iii and the three parts of henry vi, written in the early s during a vogue for historical drama. shakespeares plays are difficult to date precisely, however, and studies of the texts suggest that titus andronicus, the comedy of errors, the taming of the shrew, and the two gentlemen of verona may also belong to shakespeares earliest period. his first histories, which draw heavily on the  edition of raphael holinsheds chronicles of england, scotland, and ireland, dramatise the destructive results of weak or corrupt rule and have been interpreted as a justification for the origins of the tudor dynasty. the early plays were influenced by the works of other elizabethan dramatists, especially thomas kyd and christopher marlowe, by the traditions of medieval drama, and by the plays of seneca. the comedy of errors was also based on classical models, but no source for the taming of the shrew has been found, though it is related to a separate play of the same name and may have derived from a folk story. like the two gentlemen of verona, in which two friends appear to approve of rape, the shrews story of the taming of a womans independent spirit by a man sometimes troubles modern critics, directors, and audiences.

shakespeares early classical and italianate comedies, containing tight double plots and precise comic sequences, give way in the mids to the romantic atmosphere of his most acclaimed comedies. a midsummer nights dream is a witty mixture of romance, fairy magic, and comic lowlife scenes. shakespeares next comedy, the equally romantic merchant of venice, contains a portrayal of the vengeful jewish moneylender shylock, which reflects dominant elizabethan views but may appear derogatory to modern audiences. the wit and wordplay of much ado about nothing, the charming rural setting of as you like it, and the lively merrymaking of twelfth night complete shakespeares sequence of great comedies. after the lyrical richard ii, written almost entirely in verse, shakespeare introduced prose comedy into the histories of the late s, henry iv, parts  and , and henry v. his characters become more complex and tender as he switches deftly between comic and serious scenes, prose and poetry, and achieves the narrative variety of his mature work. this period begins and ends with two tragedies romeo and juliet, the famous romantic tragedy of sexually charged adolescence, love, and death; and julius caesarbased on sir thomas norths  translation of plutarchs parallel liveswhich introduced a new kind of drama. according to shakespearean scholar james shapiro, in julius caesar, the various strands of politics, character, inwardness, contemporary events, even shakespeares own reflections on the act of writing, began to infuse each other.

in the early th century, shakespeare wrote the socalled problem plays measure for measure, troilus and cressida, and alls well that ends well and a number of his best known tragedies. many critics believe that shakespeares greatest tragedies represent the peak of his art. the titular hero of one of shakespeares greatest tragedies, hamlet, has probably been discussed more than any other shakespearean character, especially for his famous soliloquy which begins to be or not to be; that is the question. unlike the introverted hamlet, whose fatal flaw is hesitation, the heroes of the tragedies that followed, othello and king lear, are undone by hasty errors of judgement. the plots of shakespeares tragedies often hinge on such fatal errors or flaws, which overturn order and destroy the hero and those he loves. in othello, the villain iago stokes othellos sexual jealousy to the point where he murders the innocent wife who loves him. in king lear, the old king commits the tragic error of giving up his powers, initiating the events which lead to the torture and blinding of the earl of gloucester and the murder of lears youngest daughter cordelia. according to the critic frank kermode, the play...offers neither its good characters nor its audience any relief from its cruelty. in macbeth, the shortest and most compressed of shakespeares tragedies, uncontrollable ambition incites macbeth and his wife, lady macbeth, to murder the rightful king and usurp the throne until their own guilt destroys them in turn. in this play, shakespeare adds a supernatural element to the tragic structure. his last major tragedies, antony and cleopatra and coriolanus, contain some of shakespeares finest poetry and were considered his most successful tragedies by the poet and critic t. s. eliot.in his final period, shakespeare turned to romance or tragicomedy and completed three more major plays cymbeline, the winters tale, and the tempest, as well as the collaboration, pericles, prince of tyre. less bleak than the tragedies, these four plays are graver in tone than the comedies of the s, but they end with reconciliation and the forgiveness of potentially tragic errors. some commentators have seen this change in mood as evidence of a more serene view of life on shakespeares part, but it may merely reflect the theatrical fashion of the day. shakespeare collaborated on two further surviving plays, henry viii and the two noble kinsmen, probably with john fletcher.

shakespeares works include the  plays printed in the first folio of , listed according to their folio classification as comedies, histories, and tragedies. two plays not included in the first folio, the two noble kinsmen and pericles, prince of tyre, are now accepted as part of the canon, with todays scholars agreeing that shakespeare made major contributions to the writing of both. no shakespearean poems were included in the first folio.

in the late th century, edward dowden classified four of the late comedies as romances, and though many scholars prefer to call them tragicomedies, dowdens term is often used. in , frederick s. boas coined the term problem plays to describe four plays alls well that ends well, measure for measure, troilus and cressida, and hamlet. dramas as singular in theme and temper cannot be strictly called comedies or tragedies, he wrote. we may, therefore, borrow a convenient phrase from the theatre of today and class them together as shakespeares problem plays. the term, much debated and sometimes applied to other plays, remains in use, though hamlet is definitively classed as a tragedy.

it is not clear for which companies shakespeare wrote his early plays. the title page of the  edition of titus andronicus reveals that the play had been acted by three different troupes. after the plagues of , shakespeares plays were performed by his own company at the theatre and the curtain in shoreditch, north of the thames. londoners flocked there to see the first part of henry iv, leonard digges recording, let but falstaff come, hal, poins, the rest ... and you scarce shall have a room. when the company found themselves in dispute with their landlord, they pulled the theatre down and used the timbers to construct the globe theatre, the first playhouse built by actors for actors, on the south bank of the thames at southwark. the globe opened in autumn , with julius caesar one of the first plays staged. most of shakespeares greatest post plays were written for the globe, including hamlet, othello, and king lear.

after the lord chamberlains men were renamed the kings men in , they entered a special relationship with the new king james. although the performance records are patchy, the kings men performed seven of shakespeares plays at court between  november , and  october , including two performances of the merchant of venice. after , they performed at the indoor blackfriars theatre during the winter and the globe during the summer. the indoor setting, combined with the jacobean fashion for lavishly staged masques, allowed shakespeare to introduce more elaborate stage devices. in cymbeline, for example, jupiter descends in thunder and lightning, sitting upon an eagle he throws a thunderbolt. the ghosts fall on their knees.the actors in shakespeares company included the famous richard burbage, william kempe, henry condell and john heminges. burbage played the leading role in the first performances of many of shakespeares plays, including richard iii, hamlet, othello, and king lear. the popular comic actor will kempe played the servant peter in romeo and juliet and dogberry in much ado about nothing, among other characters. he was replaced around  by robert armin, who played roles such as touchstone in as you like it and the fool in king lear. in , sir henry wotton recorded that henry viii was set forth with many extraordinary circumstances of pomp and ceremony. on  june, however, a cannon set fire to the thatch of the globe and burned the theatre to the ground, an event which pinpoints the date of a shakespeare play with rare precision.

in , john heminges and henry condell, two of shakespeares friends from the kings men, published the first folio, a collected edition of shakespeares plays. it contained  texts, including  printed for the first time. the others had already appeared in quarto versionsflimsy books made from sheets of paper folded twice to make four leaves. no evidence suggests that shakespeare approved these editions, which the first folio describes as stoln and surreptitious copies.alfred pollard termed some of the pre versions as bad quartos because of their adapted, paraphrased or garbled texts, which may in places have been reconstructed from memory. where several versions of a play survive, each differs from the other. the differences may stem from copying or printing errors, from notes by actors or audience members, or from shakespeares own papers. in some cases, for example, hamlet, troilus and cressida, and othello, shakespeare could have revised the texts between the quarto and folio editions. in the case of king lear, however, while most modern editions do conflate them, the  folio version is so different from the  quarto that the oxford shakespeare prints them both, arguing that they cannot be conflated without confusion.

in  and , when the theatres were closed because of plague, shakespeare published two narrative poems on sexual themes, venus and adonis and the rape of lucrece. he dedicated them to henry wriothesley, earl of southampton. in venus and adonis, an innocent adonis rejects the sexual advances of venus; while in the rape of lucrece, the virtuous wife lucrece is raped by the lustful tarquin. influenced by ovids metamorphoses, the poems show the guilt and moral confusion that result from uncontrolled lust. both proved popular and were often reprinted during shakespeares lifetime. a third narrative poem, a lovers complaint, in which a young woman laments her seduction by a persuasive suitor, was printed in the first edition of the sonnets in . most scholars now accept that shakespeare wrote a lovers complaint. critics consider that its fine qualities are marred by leaden effects. the phoenix and the turtle, printed in robert chesters  loves martyr, mourns the deaths of the legendary phoenix and his lover, the faithful turtle dove. in , two early drafts of sonnets  and  appeared in the passionate pilgrim, published under shakespeares name but without his permission.

published in , the sonnets were the last of shakespeares nondramatic works to be printed. scholars are not certain when each of the  sonnets was composed, but evidence suggests that shakespeare wrote sonnets throughout his career for a private readership. even before the two unauthorised sonnets appeared in the passionate pilgrim in , francis meres had referred in  to shakespeares sugred sonnets among his private friends. few analysts believe that the published collection follows shakespeares intended sequence. he seems to have planned two contrasting series one about uncontrollable lust for a married woman of dark complexion , and one about conflicted love for a fair young man . it remains unclear if these figures represent real individuals, or if the authorial i who addresses them represents shakespeare himself, though wordsworth believed that with the sonnets shakespeare unlocked his heart.

the  edition was dedicated to a mr. w.h., credited as the only begetter of the poems. it is not known whether this was written by shakespeare himself or by the publisher, thomas thorpe, whose initials appear at the foot of the dedication page; nor is it known who mr. w.h. was, despite numerous theories, or whether shakespeare even authorised the publication. critics praise the sonnets as a profound meditation on the nature of love, sexual passion, procreation, death, and time.

shakespeares first plays were written in the conventional style of the day. he wrote them in a stylised language that does not always spring naturally from the needs of the characters or the drama. the poetry depends on extended, sometimes elaborate metaphors and conceits, and the language is often rhetoricalwritten for actors to declaim rather than speak. the grand speeches in titus andronicus, in the view of some critics, often hold up the action, for example; and the verse in the two gentlemen of verona has been described as stilted.

however, shakespeare soon began to adapt the traditional styles to his own purposes. the opening soliloquy of richard iii has its roots in the selfdeclaration of vice in medieval drama. at the same time, richards vivid selfawareness looks forward to the soliloquies of shakespeares mature plays. no single play marks a change from the traditional to the freer style. shakespeare combined the two throughout his career, with romeo and juliet perhaps the best example of the mixing of the styles. by the time of romeo and juliet, richard ii, and a midsummer nights dream in the mids, shakespeare had begun to write a more natural poetry. he increasingly tuned his metaphors and images to the needs of the drama itself.

shakespeares standard poetic form was blank verse, composed in iambic pentameter. in practice, this meant that his verse was usually unrhymed and consisted of ten syllables to a line, spoken with a stress on every second syllable. the blank verse of his early plays is quite different from that of his later ones. it is often beautiful, but its sentences tend to start, pause, and finish at the end of lines, with the risk of monotony. once shakespeare mastered traditional blank verse, he began to interrupt and vary its flow. this technique releases the new power and flexibility of the poetry in plays such as julius caesar and hamlet. shakespeare uses it, for example, to convey the turmoil in hamlets mind

after hamlet, shakespeare varied his poetic style further, particularly in the more emotional passages of the late tragedies. the literary critic a. c. bradley described this style as more concentrated, rapid, varied, and, in construction, less regular, not seldom twisted or elliptical. in the last phase of his career, shakespeare adopted many techniques to achieve these effects. these included runon lines, irregular pauses and stops, and extreme variations in sentence structure and length. in macbeth, for example, the language darts from one unrelated metaphor or simile to another was the hope drunk/ wherein you dressed yourself ; ... pity, like a naked newborn babe/ striding the blast, or heavens cherubim, horsd/ upon the sightless couriers of the air ... . the listener is challenged to complete the sense. the late romances, with their shifts in time and surprising turns of plot, inspired a last poetic style in which long and short sentences are set against one another, clauses are piled up, subject and object are reversed, and words are omitted, creating an effect of spontaneity.shakespeare combined poetic genius with a practical sense of the theatre. like all playwrights of the time, he dramatised stories from sources such as plutarch and holinshed. he reshaped each plot to create several centres of interest and to show as many sides of a narrative to the audience as possible. this strength of design ensures that a shakespeare play can survive translation, cutting, and wide interpretation without loss to its core drama. as shakespeares mastery grew, he gave his characters clearer and more varied motivations and distinctive patterns of speech. he preserved aspects of his earlier style in the later plays, however. in shakespeares late romances, he deliberately returned to a more artificial style, which emphasised the illusion of theatre.

shakespeares work has made a significant and lasting impression on later theatre and literature. in particular, he expanded the dramatic potential of characterisation, plot, language, and genre. until romeo and juliet, for example, romance had not been viewed as a worthy topic for tragedy. soliloquies had been used mainly to convey information about characters or events, but shakespeare used them to explore characters minds. his work heavily influenced later poetry. the romantic poets attempted to revive shakespearean verse drama, though with little success. critic george steiner described all english verse dramas from coleridge to tennyson as feeble variations on shakespearean themes. john milton, considered by many to be the most important english poet after shakespeare, wrote in tribute thou in our wonder and astonishment/ has built thyself a livelong monument.shakespeare influenced novelists such as thomas hardy, william faulkner, and charles dickens. the american novelist herman melvilles soliloquies owe much to shakespeare; his captain ahab in mobydick is a classic tragic hero, inspired by king lear. scholars have identified , pieces of music linked to shakespeares works. these include three operas by giuseppe verdi, macbeth, otello and falstaff, whose critical standing compares with that of the source plays. shakespeare has also inspired many painters, including the romantics and the preraphaelites, while william hogarths  painting of actor david garrick playing richard iii was decisive in establishing the genre of theatrical portraiture in britain. the swiss romantic artist henry fuseli, a friend of william blake, even translated macbeth into german. the psychoanalyst sigmund freud drew on shakespearean psychology, in particular, that of hamlet, for his theories of human nature. shakespeare has been a rich source for filmmakers; akira kurosawa adapted macbeth and king lear as throne of blood and ran, respectively. other examples of shakespeare on film include max reinhardts a midsummer nights dream, laurence oliviers hamlet and al pacinos documentary looking for richard. orson welles, a lifelong lover of shakespeare, directed and starred in films of macbeth and othello, and chimes at midnight, in which he plays john falstaff, which welles himself called his best work.in shakespeares day, english grammar, spelling, and pronunciation were less standardised than they are now, and his use of language helped shape modern english. samuel johnson quoted him more often than any other author in his a dictionary of the english language, the first serious work of its type. expressions such as with bated breath  and a foregone conclusion  have found their way into everyday english speech.shakespeares influence extends far beyond his native england and the english language. his reception in germany was particularly significant; as early as the th century shakespeare was widely translated and popularised in germany, and gradually became a classic of the german weimar era; christoph martin wieland was the first to produce complete translations of shakespeares plays in any language. actor and theatre director simon callow writes, this master, this titan, this genius, so profoundly british and so effortlessly universal, each different culture  german, italian, russian  was obliged to respond to the shakespearean example; for the most part, they embraced it, and him, with joyous abandon, as the possibilities of language and character in action that he celebrated liberated writers across the continent. some of the most deeply affecting productions of shakespeare have been nonenglish, and noneuropean. he is that unique writer he has something for everyone.according to guinness world records, shakespeare remains the worlds bestselling playwright, with sales of his plays and poetry believed to have achieved in excess of four billion copies in the almost  years since his death. he is also the third most translated author in history.

shakespeare was not revered in his lifetime, but he received a large amount of praise. in , the cleric and author francis meres singled him out from a group of english playwrights as the most excellent in both comedy and tragedy. the authors of the parnassus plays at st johns college, cambridge, numbered him with chaucer, gower, and spenser. in the first folio, ben jonson called shakespeare the soul of the age, the applause, delight, the wonder of our stage, although he had remarked elsewhere that shakespeare wanted art .between the restoration of the monarchy in  and the end of the th century, classical ideas were in vogue. as a result, critics of the time mostly rated shakespeare below john fletcher and ben jonson. thomas rymer, for example, condemned shakespeare for mixing the comic with the tragic. nevertheless, poet and critic john dryden rated shakespeare highly, saying of jonson, i admire him, but i love shakespeare. he also famously remarked that shakespeare was naturally learned; he needed not the spectacles of books to read nature; he looked inwards, and found her there. for several decades, rymers view held sway. but during the th century, critics began to respond to shakespeare on his own terms and, like dryden, to acclaim what they termed his natural genius. a series of scholarly editions of his work, notably those of samuel johnson in  and edmond malone in , added to his growing reputation. by , he was firmly enshrined as the national poet, and described as the bard of avon . in the th and th centuries, his reputation also spread abroad. among those who championed him were the writers voltaire, goethe, stendhal, and victor hugo.

during the romantic era, shakespeare was praised by the poet and literary philosopher samuel taylor coleridge, and the critic august wilhelm schlegel translated his plays in the spirit of german romanticism. in the th century, critical admiration for shakespeares genius often bordered on adulation. this king shakespeare, the essayist thomas carlyle wrote in , does not he shine, in crowned sovereignty, over us all, as the noblest, gentlest, yet strongest of rallying signs; indestructible. the victorians produced his plays as lavish spectacles on a grand scale. the playwright and critic george bernard shaw mocked the cult of shakespeare worship as bardolatry, claiming that the new naturalism of ibsens plays had made shakespeare obsolete.the modernist revolution in the arts during the early th century, far from discarding shakespeare, eagerly enlisted his work in the service of the avantgarde. the expressionists in germany and the futurists in moscow mounted productions of his plays. marxist playwright and director bertolt brecht devised an epic theatre under the influence of shakespeare. the poet and critic t. s. eliot argued against shaw that shakespeares primitiveness in fact made him truly modern. eliot, along with g. wilson knight and the school of new criticism, led a movement towards a closer reading of shakespeares imagery. in the s, a wave of new critical approaches replaced modernism and paved the way for postmodern studies of shakespeare. by the s, shakespeare studies were open to movements such as structuralism, feminism, new historicism, africanamerican studies, and queer studies. comparing shakespeares accomplishments to those of leading figures in philosophy and theology, harold bloom wrote, shakespeare was larger than plato and than st. augustine. he encloses us because we see with his fundamental perceptions.

around  years after shakespeares death, doubts began to be expressed about the authorship of the works attributed to him. proposed alternative candidates include francis bacon, christopher marlowe, and edward de vere, th earl of oxford. several group theories have also been proposed. all but a few shakespeare scholars and literary historians consider it a fringe theory, with only a small minority of academics who believe that there is reason to question the traditional attribution, but interest in the subject, particularly the oxfordian theory of shakespeare authorship, continues into the st century.

shakespeare conformed to the official state religion, but his private views on religion have been the subject of debate. shakespeares will uses a protestant formula, and he was a confirmed member of the church of england, where he was married, his children were baptised, and where he is buried. some scholars claim that members of shakespeares family were catholics, at a time when practising catholicism in england was against the law. shakespeares mother, mary arden, certainly came from a pious catholic family. the strongest evidence might be a catholic statement of faith signed by his father, john shakespeare, found in  in the rafters of his former house in henley street. however, the document is now lost and scholars differ as to its authenticity. in , the authorities reported that john shakespeare had missed church for fear of process for debt, a common catholic excuse. in , the name of williams daughter susanna appears on a list of those who failed to attend easter communion in stratford. other authors argue that there is a lack of evidence about shakespeares religious beliefs. scholars find evidence both for and against shakespeares catholicism, protestantism, or lack of belief in his plays, but the truth may be impossible to prove.

few details of shakespeares sexuality are known. at , he married yearold anne hathaway, who was pregnant. susanna, the first of their three children, was born six months later on  may . over the centuries, some readers have posited that shakespeares sonnets are autobiographical, and point to them as evidence of his love for a young man. others read the same passages as the expression of intense friendship rather than romantic love. the  socalled dark lady sonnets, addressed to a married woman, are taken as evidence of heterosexual liaisons.

no written contemporary description of shakespeares physical appearance survives, and no evidence suggests that he ever commissioned a portrait, so the droeshout engraving, which ben jonson approved of as a good likeness, and his stratford monument provide perhaps the best evidence of his appearance. from the th century, the desire for authentic shakespeare portraits fuelled claims that various surviving pictures depicted shakespeare. that demand also led to the production of several fake portraits, as well as misattributions, repaintings, and relabelling of portraits of other people.

sir winston leonard spencer churchill  was a british statesman, soldier, and writer who twice served as prime minister of the united kingdom, from  to  during the second world war, and again from  to . apart from two years between  and , he was a member of parliament  from  to  and represented a total of five constituencies. ideologically an adherent to economic liberalism and imperialism, he was for most of his career a member of the conservative party, which he led from  to . he was a member of the liberal party from  to .

of mixed english and american parentage, churchill was born in oxfordshire into the wealthy, aristocratic spencer family. he joined the british army in  and saw action in british india, the mahdist war , and the second boer war, later gaining fame as a war correspondent and writing books about his campaigns. elected a conservative mp in , he defected to the liberals in . in h. h. asquiths liberal government, churchill served as president of the board of trade and home secretary, championing prison reform and workers social security. as first lord of the admiralty during the first world war, he oversaw the gallipoli campaign but, after it proved a disaster, he was demoted to chancellor of the duchy of lancaster. he resigned in november  and joined the royal scots fusiliers on the western front for six months. in , he returned to government under david lloyd george and served successively as minister of munitions, secretary of state for war, secretary of state for air, and secretary of state for the colonies, overseeing the angloirish treaty and british foreign policy in the middle east. after two years out of parliament, he served as chancellor of the exchequer in stanley baldwins conservative government, returning the pound sterling in  to the gold standard at its prewar parity, a move widely seen as creating deflationary pressure and depressing the uk economy.

out of government during his socalled wilderness years in the s, churchill took the lead in calling for british rearmament to counter the growing threat of militarism in nazi germany. at the outbreak of the second world war he was reappointed first lord of the admiralty. in may , he became prime minister, succeeding neville chamberlain. churchill formed a national government and oversaw british involvement in the allied war effort against the axis powers, resulting in victory in . after the conservatives defeat in the  general election, he became leader of the opposition. amid the developing cold war with the soviet union, he publicly warned of an iron curtain of soviet influence in europe and promoted european unity. between his terms as prime minister, he wrote several books recounting his experience during the war. he was awarded the nobel prize for literature in . he lost the  election but was returned to office in . his second term was preoccupied with foreign affairs, especially angloamerican relations and preservation of what remained of the british empire with india now no longer part of it. domestically, his government emphasised housebuilding and completed the development of a nuclear weapon . in declining health, churchill resigned as prime minister in , remaining an mp until . upon his death in , he was given a state funeral.

widely considered one of the th centurys most significant figures, churchill remains popular in the uk and the rest of the anglosphere where he is generally viewed as a victorious wartime leader who played an important role in defending liberal democracy against the spread of fascism. while he has been criticised for his views on race and empire alongside some of his wartime decisions, historians often rank churchill as the greatest prime minister in british history.

churchill was born on  november  at his familys ancestral home, blenheim palace in oxfordshire. on his fathers side, he was a member of the british aristocracy as a direct descendant of john churchill, st duke of marlborough. his father, lord randolph churchill, representing the conservative party, had been elected member of parliament  for woodstock in . his mother, jennie, was a daughter of leonard jerome, a wealthy american businessman.in , churchills paternal grandfather, john spencerchurchill, th duke of marlborough, was appointed viceroy of ireland, then part of the united kingdom. randolph became his private secretary and the family relocated to dublin. winstons brother, jack, was born there in . throughout much of the s, randolph and jennie were effectively estranged, and the brothers were mostly cared for by their nanny, elizabeth everest. when she died in , churchill wrote that she had been my dearest and most intimate friend during the whole of the twenty years i had lived.churchill began boarding at st georges school in ascot, berkshire, at age seven but was not academic and his behaviour was poor. in , he transferred to brunswick school in hove, where his academic performance improved. in april , aged , he narrowly passed the entrance exam for harrow school. his father wanted him to prepare for a military career and so his last three years at harrow were in the army form. after two unsuccessful attempts to gain admittance to the royal military academy, sandhurst, he succeeded on his third. he was accepted as a cadet in the cavalry, starting in september . his father died in january , a month after churchill graduated from sandhurst.

in february , churchill was commissioned as a second lieutenant in the th queens own hussars regiment of the british army, based at aldershot. eager to witness military action, he used his mothers influence to get himself posted to a war zone. in the autumn of , he and his friend reggie barnes, then a subaltern, went to cuba to observe the war of independence and became involved in skirmishes after joining spanish troops attempting to suppress independence fighters. churchill sent reports about the conflict to the daily graphic in london. he proceeded to new york city and, in admiration of the united states, wrote to his mother about what an extraordinary people the americans are. with the hussars, he went to bombay in october . based in bangalore, he was in india for  months, visiting calcutta three times and joining expeditions to hyderabad and the north west frontier.in india, churchill began a selfeducation project, reading a range of authors including plato, edward gibbon, charles darwin and thomas babington macaulay. the books were sent to him by his mother, with whom he shared frequent correspondence when abroad. in order to learn about politics, he also asked his mother to send him copies of the annual register, the political almanac. in one  letter to her, he referred to his religious beliefs, saying i do not accept the christian or any other form of religious belief. churchill had been christened in the church of england but, as he related later, he underwent a virulently antichristian phase in his youth, and as an adult was an agnostic. in another letter to one of his cousins, he referred to religion as a delicious narcotic and expressed a preference for protestantism over roman catholicism because he felt it a step nearer reason.interested in british parliamentary affairs, he declared himself a liberal in all but name, adding that he could never endorse the liberal partys support for irish home rule. instead, he allied himself to the tory democracy wing of the conservative party and on a visit home, gave his first public speech for the partys primrose league at claverton down, near bath. mixing reformist and conservative perspectives, he supported the promotion of secular, nondenominational education while opposing womens suffrage.churchill volunteered to join bindon bloods malakand field force in its campaign against mohmand rebels in the swat valley of northwest india. blood accepted him on condition that he was assigned as a journalist, the beginning of churchills writing career. he returned to bangalore in october  and there wrote his first book, the story of the malakand field force, which received positive reviews. he also wrote his only work of fiction, savrola, a ruritanian romance. to keep himself fully occupied, churchill embraced writing as what roy jenkins calls his whole habit, especially through his political career when he was out of office. writing was his main safeguard against recurring depression, which he referred to as his black dog.using his contacts in london, churchill got himself attached to general kitcheners campaign in the sudan as a st lancers subaltern while, additionally, working as a journalist for the morning post. after fighting in the battle of omdurman on  september , the st lancers were stood down. in october, churchill returned to england and began writing the river war, an account of the campaign which was published in november ; it was at this time that he decided to leave the army. he was critical of kitcheners actions during the war, particularly the latters unmerciful treatment of enemy wounded and his desecration of muhammad ahmads tomb in omdurman.on  december , churchill embarked for india to settle his military business and complete his resignation from the th hussars. he spent a lot of his time there playing polo, the only ball sport in which he was ever interested. having left the hussars, he sailed from bombay on  march , determined to launch a career in politics.

seeking a parliamentary career, churchill spoke at conservative meetings and was selected as one of the partys two parliamentary candidates for the june  byelection in oldham, lancashire. while campaigning in oldham, churchill referred to himself as a conservative and a tory democrat. although the oldham seats had previously been held by the conservatives, the result was a narrow liberal victory.anticipating the outbreak of the second boer war between britain and the boer republics, churchill sailed to south africa as a journalist for the morning post under the editorship of james nicol dunn. in october, he travelled to the conflict zone near ladysmith, then besieged by boer troops, before heading for colenso. after his train was derailed by boer artillery shelling, he was captured as a prisoner of war  and interned in a boer pow camp in pretoria. in december, churchill escaped from the prison and evaded his captors by stowing away aboard freight trains and hiding in a mine. he eventually made it to safety in portuguese east africa. his escape attracted much publicity.in january , he briefly rejoined the army as a lieutenant in the south african light horse regiment, joining redvers bullers fight to relieve the siege of ladysmith and take pretoria. he was among the first british troops into both places. he and his cousin, the charles spencerchurchill, th duke of marlborough, demanded and received the surrender of  boer prison camp guards. throughout the war, he had publicly chastised antiboer prejudices, calling for them to be treated with generosity and tolerance, and after the war he urged the british to be magnanimous in victory. in july, having resigned his lieutenancy, he returned to britain. his morning post despatches had been published as london to ladysmith via pretoria and had sold well.churchill rented a flat in londons mayfair, using it as his base for the next six years. he stood again as one of the conservative candidates at oldham in the october  general election, securing a narrow victory to become a member of parliament at age . in the same month, he published ian hamiltons march, a book about his south african experiences, which became the focus of a lecture tour in november through britain, america and canada. members of parliament were unpaid and the tour was a financial necessity. in america, churchill met mark twain, president mckinley and vice president theodore roosevelt; he did not get on well with roosevelt. later, in spring , he gave more lectures in paris, madrid and gibraltar.

in february , churchill took his seat in the house of commons, where his maiden speech gained widespread press coverage. he associated with a group of conservatives known as the hughligans, but he was critical of the conservative government on various issues, especially increases in army funding. he believed that additional military expenditure should go to the navy. this upset the conservative front bench but was supported by liberals, with whom he increasingly socialised, particularly liberal imperialists like h. h. asquith. in this context, churchill later wrote that he drifted steadily to the left of parliamentary politics. he privately considered the gradual creation by an evolutionary process of a democratic or progressive wing to the conservative party, or alternately a central party to unite the conservatives and liberals.by , there was real division between churchill and the conservatives, largely because he opposed their promotion of economic protectionism. as a free trader, he took part in the foundation of the free food league. churchill sensed that the animosity of many party members would prevent him from gaining a cabinet position under a conservative government. the liberal party was then attracting growing support, and so his defection in  may also have been influenced by personal ambition. he increasingly voted with the liberals against the government. for example, he opposed an increase in military expenditure; he supported a liberal bill to restore legal rights to trade unions; and he opposed the introduction of tariffs on goods imported into the british empire, describing himself as a sober admirer of the principles of free trade. arthur balfours government announced protectionist legislation in october . two months later, incensed by churchills criticism of the government, the oldham conservative association informed him that it would not support his candidature at the next general election.in may , churchill opposed the governments proposed aliens bill, designed to curb jewish migration into britain. he stated that the bill would appeal to insular prejudice against foreigners, to racial prejudice against jews, and to labour prejudice against competition and expressed himself in favour of the old tolerant and generous practice of free entry and asylum to which this country has so long adhered and from which it has so greatly gained. on  may , he crossed the floor, defecting from the conservatives to sit as a member of the liberal party in the house of commons.

as a liberal, churchill attacked government policy and gained a reputation as a radical under the influences of john morley and david lloyd george. in december , balfour resigned as prime minister and king edward vii invited the liberal leader henry campbellbannerman to take his place. hoping to secure a working majority in the house of commons, campbellbannerman called a general election in january , which the liberals won. churchill won the manchester north west seat. in the same month, his biography of his father was published; he received an advance payment of ,. it was generally well received. it was also at this time that the first biography of churchill himself, written by the liberal alexander maccallum scott, was published.in the new government, churchill became undersecretary of state for the colonial office, a junior ministerial position that he had requested. he worked beneath the secretary of state for the colonies, victor bruce, th earl of elgin, and took edward marsh as his secretary; marsh remained churchills secretary for  years. churchills first task was helping to draft a constitution for the transvaal; and he helped oversee the formation of a government in the orange river colony. in dealing with southern africa, he sought to ensure equality between the british and the boers. he also announced a gradual phasing out of the use of chinese indentured labourers in south africa; he and the government decided that a sudden ban would cause too much upset in the colony and might damage the economy. he expressed concerns about the relations between european settlers and the black african population; after the zulu launched their bambatha rebellion in natal, churchill complained about the disgusting butchery of the natives by europeans.

asquith succeeded the terminally ill campbellbannerman on  april  and, four days later, churchill was appointed president of the board of trade, succeeding lloyd george who became chancellor of the exchequer. aged , churchill was the youngest cabinet member since . newly appointed cabinet ministers were legally obliged to seek reelection at a byelection and on  april, churchill lost the manchester north west byelection to the conservative candidate by  votes. on  may, the liberals stood him in the safe seat of dundee, where he won comfortably.in private life, churchill proposed marriage to clementine hozier; they were married on  september  at st margarets, westminster and honeymooned in baveno, venice, and veve castle in moravia. they lived at  eccleston square, london, and their first daughter, diana, was born in july . churchill and clementine were married for over  years until his death. the success of his marriage was important to churchills career as clementines unbroken affection provided him with a secure and happy background.one of churchills first tasks as a minister was to arbitrate in an industrial dispute among shipworkers and employers on the river tyne. he afterwards established a standing court of arbitration to deal with future industrial disputes, establishing a reputation as a conciliator. in cabinet, he worked with lloyd george to champion social reform. he promoted what he called a network of state intervention and regulation akin to that in germany.continuing lloyd georges work, churchill introduced the mines eight hours bill, which legally prohibited miners from working more than an eighthour day. in , he introduced the trade boards bill, creating trade boards which could prosecute exploitative employers. passing with a large majority, it established the principle of a minimum wage and the right of workers to have meal breaks. in may , he proposed the labour exchanges bill to establish over  labour exchanges through which the unemployed would be assisted in finding employment. he also promoted the idea of an unemployment insurance scheme, which would be partfunded by the state.to ensure funding for their reforms, lloyd george and churchill denounced reginald mckennas policy of naval expansion, refusing to believe that war with germany was inevitable. as chancellor, lloyd george presented his peoples budget on  april , calling it a war budget to eliminate poverty. with churchill as his closest ally, lloyd george proposed unprecedented taxes on the rich to fund the liberal welfare programmes. the budget was vetoed by the conservative peers who dominated the house of lords. his social reforms under threat, churchill became president of the budget league, and warned that upperclass obstruction could anger workingclass britons and lead to class war. the government called the january  general election, which resulted in a narrow liberal victory; churchill retained his seat at dundee. after the election, he proposed the abolition of the house of lords in a cabinet memorandum, suggesting that it be succeeded either by a unicameral system or by a new, smaller second chamber that lacked an inbuilt advantage for the conservatives. in april, the lords relented and the peoples budget passed into law. churchill continued to campaign against the house of lords and assisted passage of the parliament act  which reduced and restricted its powers.

in february , churchill was promoted to home secretary, giving him control over the police and prison services; he implemented a prison reform programme. measures included a distinction between criminal and political prisoners, with prison rules for the latter being relaxed. there were educational innovations like the establishment of libraries for prisoners, and a requirement for each prison to stage entertainments four times a year. the rules on solitary confinement were relaxed somewhat, and churchill proposed the abolition of automatic imprisonment of those who failed to pay fines. imprisonment of people aged between  and  was abolished except for the most serious offences. churchill reduced   of the  death  sentences passed while he was home secretary.one of the major domestic issues in britain was womens suffrage. churchill supported giving women the vote, but he would only back a bill to that effect if it had majority support from the  electorate. his proposed solution was a referendum on the issue, but this found no favour with asquith and womens suffrage remained unresolved until . many suffragettes believed that churchill was a committed opponent of womens suffrage, and targeted his meetings for protest. in november , the suffragist hugh franklin attacked churchill with a whip; franklin was arrested and imprisoned for six weeks.

in november , churchill had to deal with the tonypandy riots, in which coal miners in the rhondda valley violently protested against their working conditions. the chief constable of glamorgan requested troops to help police quell the rioting. churchill, learning that the troops were already travelling, allowed them to go as far as swindon and cardiff, but blocked their deployment; he was concerned that the use of troops could lead to bloodshed. instead he sent  london police, who were not equipped with firearms, to assist their welsh counterparts. as the riots continued, he offered the protesters an interview with the governments chief industrial arbitrator, which they accepted. privately, churchill regarded both the mine owners and striking miners as being very unreasonable. the times and other media outlets accused him of being too soft on the rioters; in contrast, many in the labour party, which was linked to the trade unions, regarded him as having been too heavyhanded. in consequence of the latter, churchill incurred the longterm suspicion of the labour movement.asquith called a general election in december  and the liberals were reelected with churchill secure in dundee. in january , churchill became involved in the siege of sidney street; three latvian burglars had killed several police officers and hidden in a house in the east end of london, which was surrounded by police. churchill stood with the police though he did not direct their operation. after the house caught fire, he told the fire brigade not to proceed into the house because of the threat posed by the armed men. afterwards, two of the burglars were found dead. although he faced criticism for his decision, he stated that he thought it better to let the house burn down rather than spend good british lives in rescuing those ferocious rascals.in march , churchill introduced the second reading of the coal mines bill in parliament. when implemented, it imposed stricter safety standards at coal mines. he also formulated the shops bill to improve the working conditions of shop workers; it faced opposition from shop owners and only passed into law in a much emasculated form. in april, lloyd george introduced the first health and unemployment insurance legislation, the national insurance act , which churchill had been instrumental in drafting. in may, clementine gave birth to their second child, randolph, named after churchills father. in response to escalating civil strife in , churchill sent troops into liverpool to quell protesting dockers and rallied against a national railway strike.during the agadir crisis of april , when there was a threat of war between france and germany, churchill suggested an alliance with france and russia to safeguard the independence of belgium, denmark and the netherlands to counter possible german expansionism. the agadir crisis had a profound effect on churchill and he altered his views about the need for naval expansion.

in october , asquith appointed churchill first lord of the admiralty, and he took up official residence at admiralty house. he created a naval war staff and, over the next two and a half years, focused on naval preparation, visiting naval stations and dockyards, seeking to improve morale, and scrutinising german naval developments. after the german government passed its  naval law to increase warship production, churchill vowed that britain would do the same and that for every new battleship built by the germans, britain would build two. he invited germany to engage in a mutual deescalation of naval building projects, but this was refused.churchill pushed for higher pay and greater recreational facilities for naval staff, an increase in the building of submarines, and a renewed focus on the royal naval air service, encouraging them to experiment with how aircraft could be used for military purposes. he coined the term seaplane and ordered  to be constructed. some liberals objected to his levels of naval expenditure; in december  he threatened to resign if his proposal for four new battleships in  was rejected. in june , he convinced the house of commons to authorise the government purchase of a  percent share in the profits of oil produced by the anglopersian oil company, to secure continued oil access for the royal navy.the central issue in britain at the time was irish home rule and, in , asquiths government introduced the home rule bill. churchill supported it and urged ulster unionists to accept it as he opposed the partition of ireland. concerning the possibility of the partition of ireland, churchill stated whatever ulsters right may be, she cannot stand in the way of the whole of the rest of ireland. half a province cannot impose a permanent veto on the nation. half a province cannot obstruct forever the reconciliation between the british and irish democracies. speaking in the house of commons on  february , churchill said what irishmen all over the world most desire is not hostility against this country, but the unity of their own. 

later, following a cabinet decision, he boosted the naval presence in ireland to deal with any unionist uprising. seeking a compromise, churchill suggested that ireland remain part of a federal united kingdom but this angered liberals and irish nationalists.as first lord, churchill was tasked with overseeing britains naval effort when the first world war began in august . in the same month, the navy transported , british troops to france and began a blockade of germanys north sea ports. churchill sent submarines to the baltic sea to assist the russian navy and he sent the marine brigade to ostend, forcing a reallocation of german troops. in september, churchill assumed full responsibility for britains aerial defence. on  october, clementine gave birth to their third child, sarah. in october, churchill visited antwerp to observe belgian defences against the besieging germans and promised british reinforcements for the city. soon afterwards, however, antwerp fell to the germans and churchill was criticised in the press. he maintained that his actions had prolonged resistance and enabled the allies to secure calais and dunkirk. in november, asquith called a war council, consisting of himself, lloyd george, edward grey, kitchener, and churchill. churchill set the development of the tank on the right track and financed its creation with admiralty funds.churchill was interested in the middle eastern theatre and wanted to relieve turkish pressure on the russians in the caucasus by staging attacks against turkey in the dardanelles. he hoped that, if successful, the british could even seize constantinople. approval was given and, in march , an anglofrench task force attempted a naval bombardment of turkish defences in the dardanelles. in april, the mediterranean expeditionary force, including the australian and new zealand army corps , began its assault at gallipoli. both campaigns failed and churchill was held by many mps, particularly conservatives, to be personally responsible.in may, asquith agreed under parliamentary pressure to form an allparty coalition government, but the conservatives one condition of entry was that churchill must be removed from the admiralty. churchill pleaded his case with both asquith and conservative leader bonar law but had to accept demotion and became chancellor of the duchy of lancaster.

on  november , churchill resigned from the government, although he remained an mp. asquith rejected his request to be appointed governorgeneral of british east africa.churchill decided to return to active service with the army and was attached to the nd grenadier guards, on the western front. in january , he was temporarily promoted to lieutenantcolonel and given command of the th royal scots fusiliers. after a period of training, the battalion was moved to a sector of the belgian front near ploegsteert. for over three months, they faced continual shelling although no german offensive. churchill narrowly escaped death when, during a visit by his staff officer cousin the th duke of marlborough, a large piece of shrapnel fell between them. in may, the th royal scots fusiliers were merged into the th division. churchill did not request a new command, instead securing permission to leave active service. his temporary promotion ended on  may , when he returned to the rank of major.back in the house of commons, churchill spoke out on war issues, calling for conscription to be extended to the irish, greater recognition of soldiers bravery, and for the introduction of steel helmets for troops. it was in november  that he penned the greater application of mechanical power to the prosecution of an offensive on land, but it fell on deaf ears. he was frustrated at being out of office as a backbencher, but he was repeatedly blamed for gallipoli, mainly by the proconservative press. churchill argued his case before the dardanelles commission, whose published report placed no blame on him personally for the campaigns failure.

in october , asquith resigned as prime minister and was succeeded by lloyd george who, in may , sent churchill to inspect the french war effort. in july, churchill was appointed minister of munitions. he quickly negotiated an end to a strike in munitions factories along the clyde and increased munitions production. it was in his october  letter to the attention of his cabinet colleagues that he penned the plan of attack for the next year that would bring final victory to the allies. he ended a second strike, in june , by threatening to conscript strikers into the army. in the house of commons, churchill voted in support of the representation of the people act , which gave some british women the right to vote. in november , four days after the armistice, churchills fourth child, marigold, was born.

with the war over, lloyd george called a general election with voting on saturday,  december . during the election campaign, churchill called for the nationalisation of the railways, a control on monopolies, tax reform, and the creation of a league of nations to prevent future wars. he was returned as mp for dundee and, although the conservatives won a majority, lloyd george was retained as prime minister. in january , lloyd george moved churchill to the war office as both secretary of state for war and secretary of state for air.churchill was responsible for demobilising the british army, although he convinced lloyd george to keep a million men conscripted for the british army of the rhine. churchill was one of the few government figures who opposed harsh measures against the defeated germany, and he cautioned against demobilising the german army, warning that they might be needed as a bulwark against threats from the newly established soviet russia. he was an outspoken opponent of vladimir lenins new communist party government in russia. he initially supported the use of british troops to assist the anticommunist white forces in the russian civil war, but soon recognised the desire of the british people to bring them home. after the soviets won the civil war, churchill proposed a cordon sanitaire around the country.in the irish war of independence, he supported the use of the paramilitary black and tans to combat irish revolutionaries. after british troops in iraq clashed with kurdish rebels, churchill authorised two squadrons to the area, proposing that they be equipped with poison gas to be used to inflict punishment upon recalcitrant natives without inflicting grave injury upon them, although this was never implemented. there is debate as to whether this would have included mustard gas or otherwise lacrimatory gas . more broadly, he saw the occupation of iraq as a drain on britain and proposed, unsuccessfully, that the government should hand control of central and northern iraq back to turkey.

 churchill became secretary of state for the colonies in february . the following month, the first exhibit of his paintings was held; it took place in paris, with churchill exhibiting under a pseudonym. in may, his mother died; followed in august by his twoyearold daughter marigold who died from septicaemia. marigolds death devastated her parents and churchill was haunted by the tragedy for the rest of his life.churchill was involved in negotiations with sinn fin leaders and helped draft the angloirish treaty. elsewhere, he was responsible for reducing the cost of occupying the middle east, and was involved in the installations of faisal i of iraq and his brother abdullah i of jordan. churchill travelled to mandatory palestine where, as a supporter of zionism, he refused an arab palestinian petition to prohibit jewish migration to palestine. he did allow some temporary restrictions following the  jaffa riots.in september , the chanak crisis erupted as turkish forces threatened to occupy the dardanelles neutral zone, which was policed by the british army based in chanak . churchill and lloyd george favoured military resistance to any turkish advance but the majority conservatives in the coalition government opposed it. a political debacle ensued which resulted in the conservative withdrawal from the government, precipitating the november  general election.also in september, churchills fifth and last child, mary, was born, and in the same month he purchased chartwell, in kent, which became his family home for the rest of his lifetime. in october , he underwent an operation for appendicitis. while he was in hospital, lloyd georges coalition was dissolved. in the general election, churchill lost his dundee seat  to edwin scrymgeour, a prohibitionist candidate. later, he wrote that he was without an office, without a seat, without a party, and without an appendix. still, he could be satisfied with his elevation as one of  companions of honour, as named in lloyd georges  dissolution honours list.

churchill spent much of the next six months at the villa rve dor near cannes, where he devoted himself to painting and writing his memoirs. he wrote an autobiographical history of the war, the world crisis. the first volume was published in april  and the rest over the next ten years.after the  general election was called, seven liberal associations asked churchill to stand as their candidate, and he selected leicester west, but he did not win the seat. a labour government led by ramsay macdonald took power. churchill had hoped they would be defeated by a conservativeliberal coalition. he strongly opposed the macdonald governments decision to loan money to soviet russia and feared the signing of an anglosoviet treaty.on  march , alienated by liberal support for labour, churchill stood as an independent antisocialist candidate in the westminster abbey byelection but was defeated. in may, he addressed a conservative meeting in liverpool and declared that there was no longer a place for the liberal party in british politics. he said that liberals must back the conservatives to stop labour and ensure the successful defeat of socialism. in july, he agreed with conservative leader stanley baldwin that he would be selected as a conservative candidate in the next general election, which was held on  october. churchill stood at epping, but he described himself as a constitutionalist. the conservatives were victorious, and baldwin formed the new government. although churchill had no background in finance or economics, baldwin appointed him as chancellor of the exchequer.

becoming chancellor on  november , churchill formally rejoined the conservative party. as chancellor, he intended to pursue his free trade principles in the form of laissezfaire economics, as under the liberal social reforms. in april , he controversially albeit reluctantly restored the gold standard in his first budget at its  parity against the advice of some leading economists including john maynard keynes. the return to gold is held to have caused deflation and resultant unemployment with a devastating impact on the coal industry. churchill presented five budgets in all to april . among his measures were reduction of the state pension age from  to ; immediate provision of widows pensions; reduction of military expenditure; income tax reductions and imposition of taxes on luxury items.during the general strike of , churchill edited the british gazette, the governments antistrike propaganda newspaper. after the strike ended, he acted as an intermediary between striking miners and their employers. he later called for the introduction of a legally binding minimum wage. in a house of commons speech in  churchill made his unique feelings on the issue of irish unity clear. he stated that ireland should be united within itself but also united to the british empire. in early , churchill visited rome where he met mussolini, whom he praised for his stand against leninism.

in the  general election, churchill retained his epping seat, but the conservatives were defeated, and macdonald formed his second labour government. out of office, churchill was prone to depression  as he sensed his political talents being wasted and time passing him by  in all such times, writing provided the antidote. he began work on marlborough his life and times, a fourvolume biography of his ancestor john churchill, st duke of marlborough. it was by this time that he had developed a reputation for being a heavy drinker of alcoholic beverages, although jenkins believes that was often exaggerated.hoping that the labour government could be ousted, he gained baldwins approval to work towards establishing a conservativeliberal coalition, although many liberals were reluctant. in october , after his return from a trip to north america, churchill published his autobiography, my early life, which sold well and was translated into multiple languages.in january , churchill resigned from the conservative shadow cabinet because baldwin supported the decision of the labour government to grant dominion status to india. churchill believed that enhanced home rule status would hasten calls for full independence. he was particularly opposed to mohandas gandhi, whom he considered a seditious middle temple lawyer, now posing as a fakir. his views enraged labour and liberal opinion although he was supported by many grassroot conservatives.the october  general election was a landslide victory for the conservatives churchill nearly doubled his majority in epping, but he was not given a ministerial position. the commons debated dominion status for india on  december and churchill insisted on dividing the house, but this backfired as only  mps supported him. he embarked on a lecture tour of north america, hoping to recoup financial losses sustained in the wall street crash. on  december, he was crossing fifth avenue in new york city when he was knocked down by a car, suffering a head wound from which he developed neuritis. to further his convalescence, he and clementine took ship to nassau for three weeks but churchill became depressed there about his financial and political losses. he returned to america in late january  and completed most of his lectures before arriving home on  march.having worked on marlborough for much of , churchill in late august decided to visit his ancestors battlefields. staying at the regina hotel in munich, he met ernst hanfstaengl, a friend of hitler, who was then rising in prominence. hanfstaengl tried to arrange a meeting between churchill and hitler, but hitler was unenthusiastic what on earth would i talk to him about he asked. after churchill raised concerns about hitlers antisemitism, hitler did not come to the hotel that day or the next. hitler allegedly told hanfstaengl that churchill was not in office and was of no consequence. soon after visiting blenheim, churchill was affected by paratyphoid fever and spent two weeks at a sanatorium in salzburg. he returned to chartwell on  september, still working on marlborough. two days later, he collapsed while walking in the grounds after a recurrence of paratyphoid which caused an ulcer to haemorrhage. he was taken to a london nursing home and remained there until late october.

after hitler came to power on  january , churchill was quick to recognise the menace of such a regime and expressed alarm that the british government had reduced air force spending and warned that germany would soon overtake britain in air force production. armed with official data provided clandestinely by two senior civil servants, desmond morton and ralph wigram, churchill was able to speak with authority about what was happening in germany, especially the development of the luftwaffe. he told the people of his concerns in a radio broadcast in november , having earlier denounced the intolerance and militarism of nazism in the house of commons. while churchill regarded mussolinis regime as a bulwark against the perceived threat of communist revolution, he opposed the italian invasion of ethiopia, despite describing the country as a primitive, uncivilised nation. writing about the spanish civil war, he referred to francos army as the antired movement, but later became critical of franco. two of his nephews, esmond and giles romilly, fought as volunteers in the international brigades in defence of the legitimate republican government.between october  and september , the four volumes of marlborough his life and times were published and sold well. in december , the india bill entered parliament and was passed in february . churchill and  other conservative mps voted against it. in june , macdonald resigned and was succeeded as prime minister by baldwin. baldwin then led the conservatives to victory in the  general election; churchill retained his seat with an increased majority but was again left out of the government.in january , edward viii succeeded his father, george v, as monarch. his desire to marry an american divorcee, wallis simpson, caused the abdication crisis. churchill supported edward and clashed with baldwin on the issue. afterwards, although churchill immediately pledged loyalty to george vi, he wrote that the abdication was premature and probably quite unnecessary.

in may , baldwin resigned and was succeeded as prime minister by neville chamberlain. at first, churchill welcomed chamberlains appointment but, in february , matters came to a head after foreign secretary anthony eden resigned over chamberlains appeasement of mussolini, a policy which chamberlain was extending towards hitler.in , churchill warned the government against appeasement and called for collective action to deter german aggression. in march, the evening standard ceased publication of his fortnightly articles, but the daily telegraph published them instead. following the german annexation of austria, churchill spoke in the house of commons, declaring that the gravity of the events... cannot be exaggerated...

a country like ours, possessed of immense territory and wealth, whose defence has been neglected, cannot avoid war by dilating upon its horrors, or even by a continuous display of pacific qualities, or by ignoring the fate of the victims of aggression elsewhere. war will be avoided, in present circumstances, only by the accumulation of deterrents against the aggressor.

he began calling for a mutual defence pact among european states threatened by german expansionism, arguing that this was the only way to halt hitler. this was to no avail as, in september, germany mobilised to invade the sudetenland in czechoslovakia. churchill visited chamberlain at downing street and urged him to tell germany that britain would declare war if the germans invaded czechoslovak territory; chamberlain was not willing to do this. on  september, chamberlain signed up to the munich agreement, agreeing to allow german annexation of the sudetenland. speaking in the house of commons on  october, churchill called the agreement a total and unmitigated defeat. following the final dismemberment of czechoslovakia in march , churchill and his supporters called for the foundation of a national coalition. his popularity increased and people began to agitate for his return to office.

on  september , the day britain declared war on germany, chamberlain reappointed churchill as first lord of the admiralty and he joined chamberlains war cabinet. churchill later claimed that the board of the admiralty sent a signal to the fleet winston is back. as first lord, churchill was one of the highestprofile ministers during the socalled phoney war, when the only significant action by british forces was at sea. churchill was ebullient after the battle of the river plate on  december  and afterwards welcomed home the crews, congratulating them on a brilliant sea fight and saying that their actions in a cold, dark winter had warmed the cockles of the british heart. on  february , churchill personally ordered captain philip vian of the destroyer hms cossack to board the german supply ship altmark in norwegian waters freeing  british merchant seamen who had been captured by the admiral graf spee. these actions, supplemented by his speeches, considerably enhanced churchills reputation.he was concerned about german naval activity in the baltic sea and initially wanted to send a naval force there but this was soon changed to a plan, codenamed operation wilfred, to mine norwegian waters and stop iron ore shipments from narvik to germany. there were disagreements about mining, both in the war cabinet and with the french government. as a result, wilfred was delayed until  april , the day before the german invasion of norway was launched.

after the allies failed to prevent the german occupation of norway, the commons held an open debate from  to  may on the governments conduct of the war. this has come to be known as the norway debate and is renowned as one of the most significant events in parliamentary history. on the second day , the labour opposition called for a division which was in effect a vote of no confidence in chamberlains government. there was considerable support for churchill on both sides of the house but, as a member of the government, he was obliged to speak on its behalf. he was called upon to wind up the debate, which placed him in the difficult position of having to defend the government without damaging his own prestige. although the government won the vote, its majority was drastically reduced amid calls for a national government to be formed.in the early hours of  may, german forces invaded belgium, luxembourg and the netherlands as a prelude to their assault on france. since the division vote, chamberlain had been trying to form a coalition but labour declared on the friday afternoon that they would not serve under his leadership, although they would accept another conservative. the only two candidates were churchill and lord halifax, the foreign secretary. the matter had already been discussed at a meeting on the th between chamberlain, halifax, churchill, and david margesson, the government chief whip. halifax admitted that he could not govern effectively as a member of the house of lords and so chamberlain advised the king to send for churchill, who became prime minister. churchill later wrote of feeling a profound sense of relief in that he now had authority over the whole scene. he believed himself to be walking with destiny and that his life so far had been a preparation for this hour and for this trial.

in may, churchill was still generally unpopular with many conservatives and probably most of the labour party. chamberlain remained conservative party leader until october when ill health forced his resignation. by that time, churchill had won the doubters over and his succession as party leader was a formality.he began his premiership by forming a fiveman war cabinet which included chamberlain as lord president of the council, labour leader clement attlee as lord privy seal , halifax as foreign secretary and labours arthur greenwood as a minister without portfolio. in practice, these five were augmented by the service chiefs and ministers who attended the majority of meetings. the cabinet changed in size and membership as the war progressed, one of the key appointments being the leading trades unionist ernest bevin as minister of labour and national service. in response to previous criticisms that there had been no clear single minister in charge of the prosecution of the war, churchill created and assumed the additional position of minister of defence, making him the most powerful wartime prime minister in british history. he drafted outside experts into government to fulfil vital functions, especially on the home front. these included personal friends like lord beaverbrook and frederick lindemann, who became the governments scientific advisor.

at the end of may, with the british expeditionary force in retreat to dunkirk and the fall of france seemingly imminent, halifax proposed that the government should explore the possibility of a negotiated peace settlement using the stillneutral mussolini as an intermediary. there were several highlevel meetings from  to  may, including two with the french premier paul reynaud. churchills resolve was to fight on, even if france capitulated, but his position remained precarious until chamberlain resolved to support him. churchill had the full support of the two labour members but knew he could not survive as prime minister if both chamberlain and halifax were against him. in the end, by gaining the support of his outer cabinet, churchill outmanoeuvred halifax and won chamberlain over. churchill believed that the only option was to fight on and his use of rhetoric hardened public opinion against a peaceful resolution and prepared the british people for a long war  jenkins says churchills speeches were an inspiration for the nation, and a catharsis for churchill himself.churchill succeeded as an orator despite being handicapped from childhood with a speech impediment. he had a lateral lisp and was unable to pronounce the letter s, verbalising it with a slur. he worked hard on his pronunciation by repeating phrases designed to cure his problem with the sibilant s. he was ultimately successful and was eventually able to say my impediment is no hindrance. in time, he turned the impediment into an asset and could use it to great effect, as when he called hitler a narzee , rather than a nazi .his first speech as prime minister, delivered to the commons on  may was the blood, toil, tears and sweat speech. it was little more than a short statement but, jenkins says, it included phrases which have reverberated down the decades. churchill made it plain to the nation that a long, hard road lay ahead and that victory was the final goal

i would say to the house... that i have nothing to offer but blood, toil, tears and sweat. we have before us an ordeal of the most grievous kind. you ask, what is our policy i will say it is to wage war, by sea, land and air, with all our might and with all the strength that god can give us; to wage war against a monstrous tyranny, never surpassed in the dark, lamentable catalogue of human crime. that is our policy. you ask, what is our aim i can answer in one word it is victory, victory at all costs, victory in spite of all terror, victory, however long and hard the road may be; for without victory, there is no survival.

operation dynamo, the evacuation of , allied servicemen from dunkirk, ended on tuesday,  june when the french rearguard surrendered. the total was far in excess of expectations and it gave rise to a popular view that dunkirk had been a miracle, and even a victory. churchill himself referred to a miracle of deliverance in his we shall fight on the beaches speech to the commons that afternoon, though he shortly reminded everyone that we must be very careful not to assign to this deliverance the attributes of a victory. wars are not won by evacuations. the speech ended on a note of defiance coupled with a clear appeal to the united states

we shall go on to the end. we shall fight in france, we shall fight on the seas and oceans, we shall fight with growing confidence and growing strength in the air. we shall defend our island, whatever the cost may be. we shall fight on the beaches, we shall fight on the landing grounds, we shall fight in the fields and in the streets, we shall fight in the hills. we shall never surrender, and even if, which i do not for a moment believe, this island or a large part of it were subjugated and starving, then our empire beyond the seas, armed and guarded by the british fleet, would carry on the struggle, until, in gods good time, the new world, with all its power and might, steps forth to the rescue and the liberation of the old.

germany initiated fall rot the following day and italy entered the war on the th. the wehrmacht occupied paris on the th and completed their conquest of france on  june. it was now inevitable that hitler would attack and probably try to invade great britain. faced with this, churchill addressed the commons on  june and delivered one of his most famous speeches, ending with this peroration

what general weygand called the battle of france is over. i expect that the battle of britain is about to begin. hitler knows that he will have to break us in this island or lose the war. let us therefore brace ourselves to our duty and so bear ourselves that if the british commonwealth and empire lasts for a thousand years, men will still say this was their finest hour.

churchill was determined to fight back and ordered the commencement of the western desert campaign on  june, an immediate response to the italian declaration of war. this went well at first while the italian army was the sole opposition and operation compass was a noted success. in early , however, mussolini requested german support and hitler sent the afrika korps to tripoli under the command of generalleutnant erwin rommel, who arrived not long after churchill had halted compass so that he could reassign forces to greece where the balkans campaign was entering a critical phase.in other initiatives through june and july , churchill ordered the formation of both the special operations executive  and the commandos. the soe was ordered to promote and execute subversive activity in nazioccupied europe while the commandos were charged with raids on specific military targets there. hugh dalton, the minister of economic warfare, took political responsibility for the soe and recorded in his diary that churchill told him and now go and set europe ablaze.

on  august , at the height of the battle of britain, churchill addressed the commons to outline the war situation. in the middle of this speech, he made a statement that created a famous nickname for the raf fighter pilots involved in the battle

the gratitude of every home in our island, in our empire, and indeed throughout the world, except in the abodes of the guilty, goes out to the british airmen who, undaunted by odds, unwearied in their constant challenge and mortal danger, are turning the tide of the world war by their prowess and by their devotion. never in the field of human conflict was so much owed by so many to so few.

the luftwaffe altered its strategy from  september  and began the blitz, which was especially intensive through october and november. churchills morale during the blitz was generally high and he told his private secretary john colville in november that he thought the threat of invasion was past. he was confident that great britain could hold its own, given the increase in output, but was realistic about its chances of actually winning the war without american intervention.

in september , the british and american governments concluded the destroyers for bases agreement, by which fifty american destroyers were transferred to the royal navy in exchange for free us base rights in bermuda, the caribbean and newfoundland. an added advantage for britain was that its military assets in those bases could be redeployed elsewhere.churchills good relations with united states president franklin d. roosevelt helped secure vital food, oil and munitions via the north atlantic shipping routes. it was for this reason that churchill was relieved when roosevelt was reelected in . upon reelection, roosevelt set about implementing a new method of providing necessities to great britain without the need for monetary payment. he persuaded congress that repayment for this immensely costly service would take the form of defending the us. the policy was known as lendlease and it was formally enacted on  march .

hitler launched his invasion of the soviet union on sunday,  june . it was no surprise to churchill, who had known since early april, from enigma decrypts at bletchley park, that the attack was imminent. he had tried to warn general secretary joseph stalin via the british ambassador to moscow, stafford cripps, but to no avail as stalin did not trust churchill. the night before the attack, already intending an address to the nation, churchill alluded to his hitherto anticommunist views by saying to colville if hitler invaded hell, i would at least make a favourable reference to the devil.

in august , churchill made his first transatlantic crossing of the war on board hms prince of wales and met roosevelt in placentia bay, newfoundland. on  august, they issued the joint statement that has become known as the atlantic charter. this outlined the goals of both countries for the future of the world and it is seen as the inspiration for the  declaration by united nations, itself the basis of the united nations which was founded in june .

on  december , the japanese attack on pearl harbor was followed by their invasion of malaya and, on the th, churchill declared war on japan. with the hope of using irish ports for counter submarine operations, churchill sent a telegram to the irish prime minister  in which he obliquely offers irish unity now is your chance. now or never a nation once again i will meet you wherever you wish. no meeting took place between the two prime ministers and there is no record of a response from the irish prime minister amon de valera three days later came the joint declaration of war by germany and italy against the united states. churchill went to washington later in the month to meet roosevelt for the first washington conference . this was important for europe first, the decision to prioritise victory in europe over victory in the pacific, taken by roosevelt while churchill was still in midatlantic. the americans agreed with churchill that hitler was the main enemy and that the defeat of germany was key to allied success. it was also agreed that the first joint angloamerican strike would be operation torch, the invasion of french north africa . originally planned for the spring of , it was finally launched in november  when the crucial second battle of el alamein was already underway.on  december, churchill addressed a joint meeting of the us congress but, that night, he suffered a mild heart attack which was diagnosed by his physician, sir charles wilson , as a coronary deficiency needing several weeks bed rest. churchill insisted that he did not need bed rest and, two days later, journeyed on to ottawa by train where he gave a speech to the canadian parliament that included the some chicken, some neck line in which he recalled french predictions in  that britain alone would have her neck wrung like a chicken. he arrived home in midjanuary, having flown from bermuda to plymouth in a boeing  clipper , to find that there was a crisis of confidence in both his coalition government and himself personally, and he decided to face a vote of confidence in the commons, which he won easily.while he was away, the eighth army, having already relieved the siege of tobruk, had pursued operation crusader against rommels forces in libya, successfully driving them back to a defensive position at el agheila in cyrenaica. on  january , however, rommel launched a surprise counterattack which drove the allies back to gazala.

elsewhere, recent british success in the battle of the atlantic was compromised by the kriegsmarines introduction of its m rotor enigma, whose signals could not be deciphered by bletchley park for nearly a year. in the far east, the news was much worse with japanese advances in all theatres, especially at sea and in malaya. at a press conference in washington, churchill had to play down his increasing doubts about the security of singapore.

churchill already had grave concerns about the fighting quality of british troops after the defeats in norway, france, greece and crete. following the fall of singapore to the japanese on  february , he felt that his misgivings were confirmed and said  the worst disaster and largest capitulation in british military history. more bad news had come on  february as the kriegsmarine pulled off its audacious channel dash, a massive blow to british naval prestige. the combined effect of these events was to sink churchills morale to its lowest point of the whole war.meanwhile, the japanese had occupied most of burma by the end of april . counteroffensives were hampered by the monsoon season and by disordered conditions in bengal and bihar, as well as a severe cyclone which devastated the region in october . a combination of factors, including the curtailment of essential rice imports from burma, poor administration, wartime inflation and a series of largescale natural disasters such as flooding and crop disease led to the bengal famine of , in which an estimated .. million people died. from december  onwards, food shortages had prompted senior officials in india to ask london for grain imports, although the colonial authorities failed to recognise the seriousness of the emerging famine and responded ineptly. churchills government was criticised for refusing to approve more imports, a policy it ascribed to an acute wartime shortage of shipping. when the british realised the full extent of the famine in september , churchill ordered the transportation of , tons of iraqi and australian grain to bengal and the war cabinet agreed to send , tons by the end of the year. during the last quarter of , , tons of rice and , tons of wheat were imported, compared to averages of , tons of rice and , tons of wheat earlier in the year. in october, churchill wrote to the newly appointed viceroy of india, lord wavell, charging him with the responsibility of ending the famine. in february , as preparation for operation overlord placed greater demands on allied shipping, churchill cabled wavell saying i will certainly help you all i can, but you must not ask the impossible. grain shipment requests continued to be turned down by the government throughout , and wavell complained to churchill in october that the vital problems of india are being treated by his majestys government with neglect, even sometimes with hostility and contempt. the relative impact of british policies on the death toll of the famine remains a matter of controversy among scholars.

on  may , the soviet foreign affairs minister, vyacheslav molotov, arrived in london and stayed until the th before going on to washington. the purpose of this visit was to sign a treaty of friendship but molotov wanted it done on the basis of certain territorial concessions regarding poland and the baltic countries. churchill and eden worked for a compromise and eventually a twentyyear treaty was formalised but with the question of frontiers placed on hold. molotov was also seeking a second front in europe but all churchill could do was confirm that preparations were in progress and make no promises on a date.churchill felt well pleased with these negotiations and said as much when he contacted roosevelt on the th. the previous day, however, rommel had launched his counteroffensive, operation venice, to begin the battle of gazala. the allies were ultimately driven out of libya and suffered a major defeat in the fall of tobruk on  june. churchill was with roosevelt when the news of tobruk reached him. he was shocked by the surrender of , troops which was, apart from singapore, the heaviest blow he received in the war. the axis advance was eventually halted at the first battle of el alamein in july and the battle of alam el halfa in early september. both sides were exhausted and in urgent need of reinforcements and supplies.churchill had returned to washington on  june. he and roosevelt agreed on the implementation of operation torch as the necessary precursor to an invasion of europe. roosevelt had appointed general dwight d. eisenhower as commanding officer of the european theater of operations, united states army . having received the news from north africa, churchill obtained shipment from america to the eighth army of  sherman tanks and  howitzers. he returned to britain on  june and had to face another motion of no confidence, this time in his central direction of the war, but again he won easily.in august, despite health concerns, churchill visited the british forces in north africa, raising morale in the process, en route to moscow for his first meeting with stalin. he was accompanied by roosevelts special envoy averell harriman. he was in moscow  august and had four lengthy meetings with stalin. although they got along quite well together on a personal level, there was little chance of any real progress given the state of the war with the germans still advancing in all theatres. stalin was desperate for the allies to open the second front in europe, as churchill had discussed with molotov in may, and the answer was the same.

while he was in cairo in early august, churchill decided to appoint field marshal alexander as field marshal auchinlecks successor as commanderinchief of the middle east theatre. command of the eighth army was given to general william gott but he was shot down and killed while flying to cairo, only three days later and general montgomery succeeded him. churchill returned to cairo from moscow on  august and could see for himself that the alexander/montgomery combination was already having an effect. he returned to england on the st, nine days before rommel launched his final offensive.

as  drew to a close, the tide of war began to turn with allied victory in the key battles of el alamein and stalingrad. until november, the allies had always been on the defensive, but from november, the germans were. churchill ordered the church bells to be rung throughout great britain for the first time since early . on  november, knowing that el alamein was a victory, he delivered one of his most memorable war speeches to the lord mayors luncheon at the mansion house in london, in response to the allied victory at el alamein this is not the end. it is not even the beginning of the end. but it is, perhaps, the end of the beginning.

in january , churchill met roosevelt at the casablanca conference , which lasted ten days. it was also attended by general charles de gaulle on behalf of the free french forces. stalin had hoped to attend but declined because of the situation at stalingrad. although churchill expressed doubts on the matter, the socalled casablanca declaration committed the allies to securing unconditional surrender by the axis powers. from morocco, churchill went to cairo, adana, cyprus, cairo again and algiers for various purposes. he arrived home on  february having been out of the country for nearly a month. he addressed the commons on the th and then became seriously ill with pneumonia the following day, necessitating more than one month of rest, recuperation and convalescence  for the latter, he moved to chequers. he returned to work in london on  march.churchill made two transatlantic crossings during the year, meeting roosevelt at both the third washington conference  in may and the first quebec conference  in august. in november, churchill and roosevelt met chinese generalissimo chiang kaishek at the cairo conference .the most important conference of the year was soon afterwards  at tehran , where churchill and roosevelt met stalin in the first of the big three meetings, preceding those at yalta and potsdam in . roosevelt and stalin cooperated in persuading churchill to commit to the opening of a second front in western europe and it was also agreed that germany would be divided after the war, but no firm decisions were made about how. on their way back from tehran, churchill and roosevelt held a second cairo conference with turkish president ismet inn, but were unable to gain any commitment from turkey to join the allies.churchill went from cairo to tunis, arriving on  december, initially as eisenhowers guest . while churchill was in tunis, he became seriously ill with atrial fibrillation and was forced to remain until after christmas while a succession of specialists was drafted in to ensure his recovery. clementine and colville arrived to keep him company; colville had just returned to downing street after more than two years in the raf. on  december, the party went on to marrakesh for convalescence. feeling much better, churchill flew to gibraltar on  january  and sailed home on the king george v. he was back in london on the morning of  january and surprised mps by attending prime ministers questions in the commons that afternoon. since  january , when he set off for the casablanca conference, churchill had been abroad or seriously ill for  of the  days.

in the autumn of , after churchills meeting with stalin in moscow, he was approached by eisenhower, commanding the north african theater of operations, united states army , and his aides on the subject of where the western allies should launch their first strike in europe. according to general mark clark, who later commanded the united states fifth army in the italian campaign, the americans openly admitted that a crosschannel operation in the near future was utterly impossible. as an alternative, churchill recommended slit the soft belly of the mediterranean and persuaded them to invade first sicily and then italy after they had defeated the afrika korps in north africa. after the war, clark still agreed that churchills analysis was correct, but he added that, when the allies landed at salerno, they found that italy was a tough old gut.the invasion of sicily began on  july and was successfully completed by  august. churchill was then all for driving straight up the italian mainland with rome as the main target, but the americans wanted to withdraw several divisions to england in the buildup of forces for operation overlord, now scheduled for the spring of . churchill was still not keen on overlord as he feared that an angloamerican army in france might not be a match for the fighting efficiency of the wehrmacht. he preferred peripheral operations, including a plan called operation jupiter for an invasion of northern norway. events in sicily had an unexpected impact in italy. king victor emmanuel sacked mussolini on  july and appointed marshal badoglio as prime minister. badoglio opened negotiations with the allies which resulted in the armistice of cassibile on  september. in response, the germans activated operation achse and took control of most of italy. although he still preferred italy to normandy as the allies main route into the third reich, churchill was deeply concerned about the strong german resistance at salerno and, later, after the allies successfully gained their bridgehead at anzio but still failed to break the stalemate, he caustically said that instead of hurling a wildcat onto the shore, the allied force had become a stranded whale.  the big obstacle was monte cassino and it was not until midmay  when it was finally overcome, enabling the allies to at last advance on rome, which was taken on  june.

the difficulties in italy caused churchill to have a change of heart and mind about allied strategy to the extent that, when the anzio stalemate developed soon after his return to england from north africa, he threw himself into the planning of overlord and set up an ongoing series of meetings with shaef and the british chiefs of staff over which he regularly presided. these were always attended by either eisenhower or his chief of staff general walter bedell smith. churchill was especially taken by the mulberry project but he was also keen to make the most of allied air power which, by the beginning of , had become overwhelming. churchill never fully lost his apprehension about the invasion, however, and underwent great fluctuation of mood as dday approached. jenkins says that he faced potential victory with much less buoyancy than when he defiantly faced the prospect of defeat four years earlier.

churchill could not ignore the need for postwar reforms covering a broad sweep of areas such as agriculture, education, employment, health, housing and welfare. the beveridge report with its five giant evils was published in november  and assumed great importance amid widespread popular acclaim. even so, churchill was not really interested because he was focused on winning the war and saw reform in terms of tidying up afterwards. his attitude was demonstrated in a sunday evening radio broadcast on  march . he was obliged to devote most of it to the subject of reform and showed a distinct lack of interest. in their respective diaries, colville said churchill had broadcast indifferently and harold nicolson said that, to many people, churchill came across the air as a worn and petulant old man.in the end, however, it was the populations demand for reform that decided the  general election. labour was perceived as the party that would deliver beveridge. arthur greenwood had initiated its preceding social insurance and allied services inquiry in june . attlee, bevin and labours other coalition ministers through the war were seen to be working towards reform and earned the trust of the electorate.

churchill was determined to be actively involved in the normandy invasion and hoped to cross the channel on dday itself  or at least on dday. his desire caused unnecessary consternation at shaef until he was effectively vetoed by the king who told churchill that, as head of all three services, he  ought to go too. churchill expected an allied death toll of , on dday but he was proven to be pessimistic because less than , died in the whole of june. he made his first visit to normandy on  june to visit montgomery, whose hq was then about five miles inland. that evening, as he was returning to london, the first v flying bombs were launched. in a longer visit to normandy on  july, churchill went to cherbourg and arromanches where he saw the mulberry harbour.

churchill met roosevelt at the second quebec conference  from  to  september . between themselves, they reached agreement on the morgenthau plan for the allied occupation of germany after the war, the intention of which was not only to demilitarise but also deindustrialise germany. eden strongly opposed it and was later able to persuade churchill to disown it. us secretary of state cordell hull also opposed it and convinced roosevelt that it was infeasible.

at the fourth moscow conference  from  to  october , churchill and eden met stalin and molotov. this conference has gained notoriety for the socalled percentages agreement in which churchill and stalin effectively agreed the postwar fate of the balkans. by that time, the soviet armies were in rumania and bulgaria. churchill suggested a scale of predominance throughout the whole region so as not to, as he put it, get at crosspurposes in small ways. he wrote down some suggested percentages of influence per country and gave it to stalin who ticked it. the agreement was that russia would have  control of romania and  control of bulgaria. the united kingdom and the united states would have  control of greece. hungary and yugoslavia would be  each. in , five years after the account of this meeting was published , soviet authorities denied that stalin had accepted such an imperialist proposal.

from  january to  february , churchill and roosevelt met for their malta conference ahead of the second big three event at yalta from  to  february. yalta had massive implications for the postwar world. there were two predominant issues the question of setting up the united nations organisation after the war, on which much progress was made; and the more vexed question of polands postwar status, which churchill saw as a test case for the future of eastern europe. churchill faced some strong criticism for the yalta agreement on poland. for example,  tory mps voted against him when the matter was debated in the commons at the end of the month. jenkins, however, maintains that churchill did as well as he could have done in very difficult circumstances, not least the fact that roosevelt was seriously ill and could not provide churchill with meaningful support.another outcome of yalta was the socalled operation keelhaul. the western allies agreed to the forcible repatriation of all soviet citizens in the allied zones, including prisoners of war, to the soviet union and the policy was later extended to all eastern european refugees, many of whom were anticommunist. keelhaul was implemented between  august  and  may .

on the nights of  february , some , british and us bombers attacked the german city of dresden, which was crowded with wounded and refugees from the eastern front. the attacks were part of an area bombing campaign that was initiated by churchill in january with the intention of shortening the war. churchill came to regret the bombing because initial reports suggested an excessive number of civilian casualties close to the end of the war, though an independent commission in  confirmed a death toll between , and ,. on  march, he decided to restrict area bombing and sent a memorandum to general ismay for the chiefs of staff committee

the destruction of dresden remains a serious query against the conduct of allied bombing..... i feel the need for more precise concentration upon military objectives..... rather than on mere acts of terror and wanton destruction, however impressive.

british historian frederick taylor has pointed out that the number of soviet citizens who died from german bombing was roughly equivalent to the number of german citizens who died from allied raids. jenkins asks if churchill was moved more by foreboding than by regret but admits it is easy to criticise with the hindsight of victory. he adds that the area bombing campaign was no more reprehensible than president trumans use of the second atomic bomb on nagasaki six months later. andrew marr, quoting max hastings, says that churchills memorandum was a calculated political attempt..... to distance himself..... from the rising controversy surrounding the area offensive.

on  may  at the shaef headquarters in reims the allies accepted germanys surrender. the next day was victory in europe day  when churchill broadcast to the nation that germany had surrendered and that a final ceasefire on all fronts in europe would come into effect at one minute past midnight that night . afterwards, churchill went to buckingham palace where he appeared on the balcony with the royal family before a huge crowd of celebrating citizens. he went from the palace to whitehall where he addressed another large crowd god bless you all. this is your victory. in our long history, we have never seen a greater day than this. everyone, man or woman, has done their best.at this point he asked ernest bevin to come forward and share the applause. bevin said no, winston, this is your day, and proceeded to conduct the people in the singing of for hes a jolly good fellow. in the evening, churchill made another broadcast to the nation asserting that the defeat of japan would follow in the coming months .

in may , winston churchill commissioned the british chiefs of staff committee to provide its thoughts on a possible military campaign against the ussr, codenamed operation unthinkable. one plan involved a surprise attack on soviet troops stationed in germany in order to impose the will of the united states and the british empire on the soviets. the hypothetical start date for the allied invasion of sovietheld europe was set for  july .

with a general election looming , and with the labour ministers refusing to continue the wartime coalition, churchill resigned as prime minister on  may . later that day, he accepted the kings invitation to form a new government, known officially as the national government, like the conservativedominated coalition of the s, but sometimes called the caretaker ministry. it contained conservatives, national liberals and a few nonparty figures such as sir john anderson and lord woolton, but not labour or archibald sinclairs official liberals. although churchill continued to carry out the functions of prime minister, including exchanging messages with the us administration about the upcoming potsdam conference, he was not formally reappointed until  may.

churchill was great britains representative at the postwar potsdam conference when it opened on  july and was accompanied at its sessions not only by eden as foreign secretary but also, pending the result of the july general election, by attlee. they attended nine sessions in nine days before returning to england for their election counts. after the landslide labour victory, attlee returned with bevin as the new foreign secretary and there were a further five days of discussion. potsdam went badly for churchill. eden later described his performance as appalling, saying that he was unprepared and verbose. churchill upset the chinese, exasperated the americans and was easily led by stalin, whom he was supposed to be resisting.

churchill mishandled the election campaign by resorting to party politics and trying to denigrate labour. on  june, he committed a serious political gaffe by saying in a radio broadcast that a labour government would require some form of gestapo to enforce its agenda. it backfired badly and attlee made political capital by saying in his reply broadcast next day the voice we heard last night was that of mr churchill, but the mind was that of lord beaverbrook. jenkins says that this broadcast was the making of attlee.although polling day was  july, the results of the election did not become known until  july, owing to the need to collect the votes of those serving overseas. clementine and daughter mary had been at the count in woodford, churchills new constituency in essex, and had returned to downing street to meet him for lunch. churchill was unopposed by the major parties in woodford, but his majority over a sole independent candidate was much less than expected. he now anticipated defeat by labour and mary later described the lunch as an occasion of stygian gloom. to clementines suggestion that election defeat might be a blessing in disguise, churchill retorted at the moment it seems very effectively disguised.that afternoon churchills doctor lord moran  commiserated with him on the ingratitude of the british public, to which churchill replied i wouldnt call it that. they have had a very hard time. having lost the election, despite enjoying much personal support amongst the british population, he resigned as prime minister that evening and was succeeded by attlee who formed the first majority labour government. many reasons have been given for churchills defeat, key among them being that a desire for postwar reform was widespread amongst the population and that the man who had led britain in war was not seen as the man to lead the nation in peace. although the conservative party was unpopular, many electors appear to have wanted churchill to continue as prime minister whatever the outcome, or to have wrongly believed that this would be possible.

churchill continued to lead the conservative party and, for six years, served as leader of the opposition. in , he was in america for nearly three months from early january to late march. it was on this trip that he gave his iron curtain speech about the ussr and its creation of the eastern bloc. speaking on  march  in the company of president truman at westminster college in fulton, missouri, churchill declared

from stettin in the baltic to trieste in the adriatic, an iron curtain has descended across the continent. behind that line lie all the capitals of the ancient states of central and eastern europe. warsaw, berlin, prague, vienna, budapest, belgrade, bucharest and sofia, all these famous cities and the populations around them lie in what i must call the soviet sphere.

the essence of his view was that, though the soviet union did not want war with the western allies, its entrenched position in eastern europe had made it impossible for the three great powers to provide the world with a triangular leadership. churchills desire was much closer collaboration between britain and america. within the same speech, he called for a special relationship between the british commonwealth and empire and the united states, but he emphasised the need for cooperation within the framework of the united nations charter.

churchill was an early proponent of paneuropeanism, having called for a united states of europe in a  article. he supported the creations of the council of europe in  and the european coal and steel community in , but his support was always with the firm proviso that britain must not actually join any federal grouping.having lived in ireland as a child, churchill always opposed its partition. as a minister in  and again in , he suggested that ulster should be part of a united ireland, but with a degree of autonomy from an independent irish government. he was always opposed on this by ulster unionists. while he was leader of the opposition, he told john w. dulanty and frederick boland, successive irish ambassadors to london, that he still hoped for reunification.labour won the  general election, but with a muchreduced majority. churchill continued to serve as leader of the opposition.

despite losing the popular vote to labour, the conservatives won an overall majority of  seats in the october  general election and churchill again became prime minister, remaining in office until his resignation on  april . eden, his eventual successor, was restored to foreign affairs, the portfolio with which churchill was preoccupied throughout his tenure. future prime minister harold macmillan was appointed minister of housing and local government with a manifesto commitment to build , new houses per annum, churchills only real domestic concern. he achieved the target and, in october , was promoted to minister of defence.

churchill was nearly  when he took office and was not in good health following several minor strokes. by december , george vi had become concerned about churchills decline and intended asking him to stand down in favour of eden, but the king had his own serious health issues and died on  february  without making the request. churchill developed a close friendship with elizabeth ii and, in the spring of , he accepted the order of the garter at her request. he was knighted as sir winston on  april . it was widely expected that he would retire after the queens coronation in june  but, after eden became seriously ill, churchill increased his own responsibilities by taking over at the foreign office. eden was incapacitated until the end of the year and was never completely well again.on the evening of  june , churchill suffered a serious stroke and became partially paralysed down one side. had eden been well, churchills premiership would most likely have been over. the matter was kept secret and churchill went home to chartwell to recuperate. he had fully recovered by november. he retired as prime minister in april  and was succeeded by eden.

churchill feared a global conflagration and firmly believed that the only way to preserve peace and freedom was to build on a solid foundation of friendship and cooperation between britain and america. he made four official transatlantic visits from january  to july .he enjoyed a good relationship with truman but difficulties arose over the planned european defence community , by which truman hoped to reduce americas military presence in west germany; churchill was sceptical about the edc. churchill wanted us military support of british interests in egypt and the middle east, but that was refused. while truman expected british military involvement in korea, he viewed any us commitment to the middle east as maintaining british imperialism. the americans recognised that the british empire was in terminal decline and had welcomed the attlee governments policy of decolonisation. churchill believed that britains position as a world power depended on the empires continued existence.churchill had been obliged to recognise colonel nassers revolutionary government of egypt, which took power in . much to churchills private dismay, agreement was reached in october  on the phased evacuation of british troops from their suez base. in addition, britain agreed to terminate its rule in angloegyptian sudan by , though this was in return for nassers abandonment of egyptian claims over the region. elsewhere, the malayan emergency, a guerrilla war fought by communist fighters against commonwealth forces, had begun in  and continued past malayan independence  until . churchills government maintained the military response to the crisis and adopted a similar strategy for the mau mau uprising in british kenya .churchill was uneasy about the election of eisenhower as trumans successor. after stalin died on  march , churchill sought a summit meeting with the soviets but eisenhower refused out of fear that the soviets would use it for propaganda. by july of that year, churchill was deeply regretting that the democrats had not been returned. he told colville that eisenhower as president was both weak and stupid. churchill believed that eisenhower did not fully comprehend the danger posed by the hbomb and he greatly distrusted eisenhowers secretary of state, john foster dulles. churchill hosted eisenhower to no avail at the threepowers bermuda conference  in december ; they met again in june/july  at the white house. in the end, it was the soviets who proposed a fourpower summit, but it did not meet until  july , three months after churchill had retired.

elizabeth ii offered to create churchill duke of london, but he declined because of the objections of his son randolph, who would have inherited the title on his fathers death. although publicly supportive, churchill was privately scathing about edens handling of the suez crisis and clementine believed that many of his visits to the united states in the following years were attempts to help repair angloamerican relations. after leaving the premiership, churchill remained an mp until he stood down at the  general election. apart from  to , he had been an mp since october  and had represented five constituencies.by the time of the  general election, he seldom attended the house of commons. despite the conservative landslide in , his own majority in woodford fell by more than . he spent most of his retirement at chartwell or at his london home in hyde park gate, and became a habitu of high society at la pausa on the french riviera.in june , when he was , churchill had a fall in monte carlo and broke his hip. he was flown home to a london hospital where he remained for three weeks. jenkins says that churchill was never the same after this accident and his last two years were something of a twilight period. in , us president john f. kennedy, acting under authorisation granted by an act of congress, proclaimed him an honorary citizen of the united states, but he was unable to attend the white house ceremony. there has been speculation that he became very depressed in his final years but this has been emphatically denied by his personal secretary anthony montague browne, who was with him for his last  years. montague browne wrote that he never heard churchill refer to depression and certainly he did not suffer from it.

churchill suffered his final stroke on  january  and died twelve days later on  january, the seventieth anniversary of his fathers death. like the duke of wellington in  and william gladstone in , churchill was given a state funeral. planning for this had begun in  under the codename of operation hope not and a detailed plan had been produced by . his coffin lay in state at westminster hall for three days and the funeral ceremony was at st pauls cathedral on  january. afterwards, the coffin was taken by boat along the river thames to waterloo station and from there by a special train to the family plot at st martins church, bladon, near his birthplace at blenheim palace.worldwide, numerous memorials have been dedicated to churchill. his statue in parliament square was unveiled by his widow clementine in  and is one of only twelve in the square, all of prominent political figures, including churchills friend lloyd george and his india policy nemesis gandhi. elsewhere in london, the wartime cabinet war rooms have been renamed the churchill museum and cabinet war rooms. churchill college, cambridge, was established as a national memorial to churchill.  an indication of churchills high esteem in the uk is the result of the  bbc poll, attracting , votes, in which he was voted the greatest briton of all time, his nearest rival being isambard kingdom brunel some , votes behind.he is one of only eight people to be granted honorary citizenship of the united states; others include lafayette, raoul wallenberg and mother teresa. the united states navy honoured him in  by naming a new arleigh burkeclass destroyer as the uss winston s. churchill. other memorials in north america include the national churchill museum in fulton, missouri, where he made the  iron curtain speech; churchill square in central edmonton, alberta; and the winston churchill range, a mountain range northwest of lake louise, also in alberta, which was renamed after churchill in .the churchill archives centre on the campus of churchill college, cambridge houses churchills personal papers and is open to the public.

churchill was a prolific writer. his output included a novel , two biographies, three volumes of memoirs, several histories, and numerous press articles. two of his most famous works, published after his first premiership brought his international fame to new heights, were his sixvolume memoir, the second world war, and the fourvolume a history of the englishspeaking peoples. in recognition of his mastery of historical and biographical description and oratorial output, churchill received the nobel prize in literature in .he used either winston s. churchill or winston spencer churchill as his pen name to avoid confusion with the american novelist of the same name, with whom he struck up a friendly correspondence. for many years, he relied heavily upon his press articles to assuage his financial worries in , for example, he wrote  published articles and some of his contracts were quite lucrative.as well as writing, churchill became an accomplished amateur artist after his resignation from the admiralty in . using the pseudonym charles morin, he continued this hobby throughout his life and completed hundreds of paintings, many of which are on show in the studio at chartwell as well as in private collections.churchill was an amateur bricklayer, constructing buildings and garden walls at chartwell. to further this hobby, he joined the amalgamated union of building trade workers but was expelled after he revived his membership of the conservative party. he also bred butterflies at chartwell, keeping them in a converted summerhouse each year until the weather was right for their release. he was well known for his love of animals and always had several pets, mainly cats but also dogs, pigs, lambs, bantams, goats and fox cubs among others. churchill has often been quoted as saying that cats look down on us and dogs look up to us, but pigs treat us as equals, or words to that effect, but the international churchill society believe he has mostly been misquoted.

roy jenkins concludes his biography of churchill by comparing him favourably with w. e. gladstone and summarising

i now put churchill, with all his idiosyncrasies, his indulgences, his occasional childishness, but also his genius, his tenacity and his persistent ability, right or wrong, successful or unsuccessful, to be larger than life, as the greatest human being ever to occupy  downing street.

churchill always selfconfidently believed himself to be a man of destiny. because of this he lacked restraint and could be reckless. his selfbelief manifested itself in terms of his affinity with war of which, according to sebastian haffner, he exhibited a profound and innate understanding. churchill considered himself a military genius but that made him vulnerable to failure and paul addison says gallipoli was the greatest blow his selfimage was ever to sustain. jenkins points out, however, that although churchill was excited and exhilarated by war, he was never indifferent to the suffering it causes.

as a politician, churchill was perceived by some observers to have been largely motivated by personal ambition rather than political principle. during his early parliamentary career, he was often deliberately provocative and argumentative to an unusual degree; and his barbed rhetorical style earned him many enemies in parliament. on the other hand, he was deemed to be an honest politician who displayed particular loyalty to his family and close friends. he was, according to jenkins, singularly lacking in inhibition or concealment. robert rhodes james said he lacked any capacity for intrigue and was refreshingly innocent and straightforward.until the outbreak of the second world war, churchills approach to politics generated widespread mistrust and dislike, largely on account of his two party defections. his biographers have variously categorised him, in terms of political ideology, as fundamentally conservative,  liberal in outlook, and never circumscribed by party affiliation. jenkins says that churchills selfbelief was far stronger than any class or tribal loyalty. whether churchill was a conservative or a liberal, he was nearly always opposed to socialism because of its propensity for state planning and his belief in free markets. the exception was during his wartime coalition when he was completely reliant upon the support of his labour colleagues. although the labour leaders were willing to join his coalition, churchill had long been regarded as an enemy of the working class. his response to the rhondda valley unrest and his antisocialist rhetoric brought condemnation from socialists. they saw him as a reactionary who represented imperialism, militarism, and the interests of the upper classes in the class war. his role in opposing the general strike earned the enmity of many strikers and most members of the labour movement. paradoxically, churchill was supportive of trade unionism, which he saw as the antithesis of socialism.on the other hand, his detractors did not take churchills domestic reforms into account, for he was in many respects a radical and a reformer, but always with the intention of preserving the existing social structure, never of challenging it. he could not empathise with the poor, so he sympathised with them instead, displaying what addison calls the attitude of a benevolent paternalist. jenkins, himself a senior labour minister, remarked that churchill had a substantial record as a social reformer for his work in the early years of his ministerial career. similarly, rhodes james thought that, as a social reformer, churchills achievements were considerable. this, said rhodes james, had been achieved because churchill as a minister had three outstanding qualities. he worked hard; he put his proposals efficiently through the cabinet and parliament; he carried his department with him. these ministerial merits are not as common as might be thought.

assessments of churchills legacy are largely based on his leadership of the british people in the second world war. even so, his personal views on empire and race continue to stir debate. churchill was a staunch imperialist and monarchist, and he consistently exhibited a romanticised view of both the british empire and the reigning monarch, especially of elizabeth ii during his last term as premier.churchill has been described as a liberal imperialist who saw british imperialism as a form of altruism that benefited its subject peoples because by conquering and dominating other peoples, the british were also elevating and protecting them. martin gilbert asserted that churchill held a hierarchical perspective of race, seeing racial characteristics as signs of the maturity of a society. churchills views on race were driven by his imperialist mindset and outlook. he advocated against black or indigenous selfrule in africa, australia, the caribbean, the americas and india, believing that the british empire promoted and maintained the welfare of those who lived in the colonies; he insisted that our responsibility to the native races remains a real one. in , churchill stated that we will endeavour ... to advance the principle of equal rights of civilised men irrespective of colour.according to addison, churchill was opposed to immigration from the commonwealth. addison makes the point that churchill opposed antisemitism  and argues that he would never have tried to stoke up racial animosity against immigrants, or to persecute minorities.  in the s, churchill supported zionism but believed that communism was the product of an international jewish conspiracy; in an article in the illustrated sunday herald, churchill wrote that a group of international jews supported a bolshevist worldwide conspiracy for the overthrow of civilisation and for the reconstitution of society on the basis of arrested development, of envious malevolence, and impossible equality. although this belief was not unique among british politicians of the time, few had the stature of churchill, and the article was criticised by the jewish chronicle at the time.churchill made a number of disparaging remarks about nonwhite ethnicities throughout his life, including a series of racist comments and jokes about indian nationalists made to colleagues during the interwar period and his wartime premiership. historian philip murphy partly attributes the strength of this vitriol to an almost childish desire to shock his inner circle. churchills response to the bengal famine was criticised by some contemporaries as slow , a controversy later increased by the publication of private remarks made to secretary for india leo amery, in which churchill allegedly said that aid would be inadequate because indians were breeding like rabbits. philip murphy says that, following the independence of india in , churchill adopted a more pragmatic stance towards empire, although he continued to use imperial rhetoric. during his second term as prime minister, he was seen as a moderating influence on britains suppression of armed insurgencies against colonial rule in malaya and kenya; he argued that ruthless policies contradicted british values and international opinion.

while the biographies by addison, gilbert, jenkins and rhodes james are among the most acclaimed works about churchill, he has been the subject of numerous others. writing in  for the international churchill society, david freeman counted  in total, excluding nonenglish books, to the end of the th century.at a public ceremony in westminster hall on  november , churchills th birthday, the joint houses of parliament presented him with a fulllength portrait of himself, which had been painted by graham sutherland. churchill and clementine reportedly hated it and, later, she had it destroyed.churchill has been widely depicted on stage and screen. notable screen biographical films include young winston , directed by richard attenborough and featuring simon ward in the title role with anne bancroft and robert shaw as his parents; winston churchill the wilderness years , starring robert hardy as churchill and sin phillips as clementine; the gathering storm , starring albert finney as churchill and vanessa redgrave as clementine; into the storm , starring brendan gleeson as churchill and janet mcteer as clementine; darkest hour , starring gary oldman as churchill. john lithgow played churchill in the crown . finney, gleeson, oldman and lithgow all won major awards for their performances as churchill.

churchill married clementine hozier in september . they remained married for  years. churchill was aware of the strain that his political career placed on his marriage, and, according to colville, he had a brief affair in the s with doris castlerosse, although this is discounted by andrew roberts.the churchills first child, diana, was born in july ; the second, randolph, in may . their third, sarah, was born in october , and their fourth, marigold, in november . marigold died in august , from sepsis of the throat, and she was buried in kensal green cemetery.  although her remains were relocated to bladon churchyard in  to join the rest of her family, her cenotaph still stands at kensal green. on  september , the churchills last child, mary, was born. later that month, the churchills bought chartwell, which would be their home until winstons death in . according to jenkins, churchill was an enthusiastic and loving father but one who expected too much of his children.

ariana grandebutera  is an american singer, songwriter, and actress.  

an influential figure in contemporary popular music, and often regarded as a pop culture icon, she is noted for her fouroctave vocal range and whistle register that has garnered critical acclaim. grande has received numerous accolades throughout her career, including two grammy awards, one brit award, one bambi award, two billboard music awards, three american music awards, nine mtv video music awards, and  guinness world records.

grande began her music career at age  in the  broadway musical . she rose to fame for playing cat valentine in the nickelodeon television series victorious  and sam  cat . grande signed with republic records in  after label executives viewed youtube videos of her covering songs. her s doowopinfluenced pop and rb debut album, yours truly , topped the us billboard , while its lead single, the way, reached the top ten of the us billboard hot . grandes voice and vocal performances on the album drew immediate comparisons to mariah carey.

grande continued to explore pop and rb in her second and third studio albums, my everything  and dangerous woman . my everything experimented with edm and achieved global success with its singles problem, break free and bang bang, while dangerous woman became her first of four consecutive numberone albums in the uk. personal struggles influenced her trapinfused fourth and fifth studio albums, sweetener  and thank u, next , both of which were critical and commercial successes. sweetener won the grammy award for best pop vocal album, and thank u, next broke the record for the largest streaming week for a pop album and was nominated for album of the year. the singles thank u, next,  rings, and break up with your girlfriend, im bored made grande the first solo artist to hold the top three spots on the hot  simultaneously and the first woman to succeed herself at the top of the uk singles chart. her  collaborations stuck with u with justin bieber and rain on me with lady gaga helped her break the record for most numberone debuts on the hot , the latter winning the grammy award for best pop duo/group performance. grande expanded on the trap genre with her sixth studio album, positions , which both the album and its title track debuted at number one in the uk and the us. her collaborations with the weeknd on the remixes of save your tears and die for you garnered her sixth and seventh us numberone singles, respectively.

grande is one of the worlds bestselling music artists, having sold over  million records globally and all her studio albums certified platinum or higher. she has broken a variety of records on the billboard chart with her albums, songs and as an artist. grande is the most streamed female artist of all time, the most streamed female artist of s on spotify and apple music, the most followed female artist on spotify, and the most subscribed female solo artist on youtube. ten of grandes songs and seven of her music videos reached  billion streams and views on spotify and vevo, respectively. grande has been included on times annual list of the  most influential people in the world  and the forbes celebrity  . grande was named woman of the year , the greatest pop star of , and the most successful female artist to debut in the s by billboard. rolling stone ranked her amongst the  greatest singers of all time . besides music, grande has worked with many charitable organizations and advocates for animal rights, mental health, and gender, racial, and lgbt equality. grande has ventured into the cosmetics, fragrances and fashion industries. she also has a large social media following and was the most followed woman on instagram in  and has over  million followers as of . her fragrance line, which was released in , exceeded  billion in sales through .

grande was born in boca raton, florida. she is the daughter of joan grande, the brooklynborn ceo of hosemccann communications, a manufacturer of communications and safety equipment owned by the grande family since , and edward butera, a graphic design firm owner in boca raton. grande is of italian descent and has described herself as an italian american with sicilian and abruzzese roots. she has an older halfbrother, frankie grande, who is an entertainer and producer. her family moved from new york to florida before her birth, and her parents separated when she was eight or nine years old. grande has a close relationship with her maternal grandmother, marjorie grande.when her parents were florida panthers season ticket holders, she was accidentally hit on each wrist by errant hockey pucks on two different occasions in , sustaining minor bruises both times. the second occurrence happened during the panthers inaugural regularseason game at national car rental center on october , , in which she was also the first child to ever ride a zamboni in the brandnew arena during the first intermission, the result of her parents  winning bid at an auction. a photograph of her on the zamboni was featured in the south florida sunsentinel the next day. at age , she sang the starspangled banner at the panthers home game against the chicago blackhawks on january , .as a young child, grande performed with the fort lauderdale childrens theater, playing her first role as the title character in the musical annie. she also performed in their productions of the wizard of oz and beauty and the beast. at age eight, she performed at a karaoke lounge on a cruise ship and with various orchestras such as south floridas philharmonic, florida sunshine pops and symphonic orchestras. during this time, she attended the pine crest school and later north broward preparatory.

by age , grande became serious about pursuing a music career, although she still concentrated on theater. when she first arrived in los angeles, california to meet with her managers, she expressed a desire to record an rb album i was like, i want to make an rb album, they were like um, thats a helluva goal who is going to buy a yearolds rb album in , grande was cast as cheerleader charlotte in the broadway musical . when she joined the musical, grande left north broward preparatory school, but continued to be enrolled; the school sent her materials to study with tutors. she also sang various times at the new york city jazz club birdland.

grande was cast in the nickelodeon television show victorious along with  costar elizabeth gillies in . in the sitcom, set at a performing arts high school, she played the adorably dimwitted cat valentine. she had to dye her hair red every other week for the role, which severely damaged her hair. the show premiered in march  to the secondlargest audience for a liveaction series in nickelodeon, with . million viewers. the role helped propel grande to teen idol status, but she was more interested in a music career, saying that acting is fun, but music has always been first and foremost with me. her character was compared to brittany murphys performance as the hapless tai in clueless and described as being very impressionable and easily swayed but generally sweet.after the first season of victorious wrapped, grande wanted to focus on her music career and began working on her debut album in august . to strengthen her vocal range, she began working with vocal coach eric vetro. the second season premiered in april  to . million viewers, becoming the shows highestrated episode. in may , grande appeared in greyson chances video for the song unfriend you from his album hold on til the night , portraying his exgirlfriend. she made her first musical appearance on the track give it up from the victorious soundtrack in august . while filming victorious, grande made several recordings of herself singing covers of songs by adele, whitney houston and mariah carey, and uploaded them to youtube. a friend of monte lipman, chief executive officer  of republic records, came across one of the videos. impressed by her vocals, he sent the links to lipman, who signed her to a recording contract. grande voiced the title role in the english dub of the spanishlanguage animated film snowflake, the white gorilla in november . from  to , she voiced the fairy princess diaspro in the nickelodeon revival of winx club.in december , grande released her first single, put your hearts up, which was recorded for a potential teenoriented pop album that was never issued. she later disowned the track for its bubblegum pop sound, saying she had no interest in recording music of that genre. the song was later certified gold by the recording industry association of america . on a second soundtrack, victorious ., released on june , , as an extended play, she supplied vocals as part of the shows cast for the song  fingaz to the face. the third and final soundtrack, victorious ., was released on november , , which featured a duet by grande and victoria justice titled l.a. boyz, with an accompanying music video being released shortly after. in december , grande collaborated on the single version of popular song, a duet with british singer and songwriter mika.after four seasons, victorious was not renewed, with the finale airing in february . grande starred as snow white in the pantomimestyle musical theatre production a snow white christmas with charlene tilton and neil patrick harris at the pasadena playhouse. she played amanda benson in swindle, a  nickelodeon film adaptation of the childrens book of the same name. meanwhile, nickelodeon created sam  cat, an icarly and victorious spinoff starring jennette mccurdy and grande. grande and mccurdy reprised their roles as cat valentine and sam puckett on the buddy sitcom, which paired the characters as roommates who form an afterschool babysitting business. the pilot aired on june , , and the network immediately picked up the show. the next month, nickelodeon doubled sam  cats original episode order for season one, making it a episode season. despite its success in the ratings, the series was canceled after  episodes. the final episode aired on july , .

grande recorded her debut studio album yours truly, originally titled daydreamin, over three years. it was released on august , , and debuted at number one on the us billboard  albums chart, with , copies sold in its first week. yours truly also debuted in the top ten in several other countries, including australia, the uk, ireland, and the netherlands. its lead single, the way, featuring pittsburgh rapper mac miller, debuted at number ten on the us billboard hot , eventually peaking at number nine for two weeks. grande was later sued by minder music for copying the line what we gotta do right here is go back, back in time from the  song troglodyte  by the jimmy castor bunch. the albums second single, baby i, was released in july. its third single, right there, featuring detroit rapper big sean, was released in august . they respectively peaked at number  and  on the billboard hot .grande recorded the duet almost is never enough with nathan sykes of the wanted, which was released as a promotional single in august . she also joined justin bieber on his believe tour for three shows and kicked off her own headlining minitour, the listening sessions. the following month, billboard magazine ranked grande at number four on their list of musics hottest minors , an annual ranking of the most popular musicians under the age of . at the  american music awards, she won the award for new artist of the year. she released a foursong christmas ep, christmas kisses in december . grande received the breakthrough artist of the year award from the music business association, recognizing her achievements throughout . by january , grande had begun recording her second studio album, with singersongwriter ryan tedder and record producers benny blanco and max martin. the same month, she earned the favorite breakout artist award at the peoples choice awards . in march , grande sang at the white house concert, women of soul in performance at the white house. the following month, president barack obama and first lady michelle obama invited grande again to perform at the white house for the easter egg roll event.grande released her second studio album my everything on august , , and debuted atop the billboard . its lead single problem features australian rapper iggy azalea and premiered at the  radio disney music awards on april , . the song debuted at number three  on the billboard hot . the albums second single, break free, featuring german musician and producer zedd, peaked at number four in the united states. she performed the song as the opening of the  mtv video music awards, and won best pop video for problem. rolling stone placed this song at number  on its list of the  most inspirational lgbtq songs of all time. grande and nicki minaj provided guest vocals on bang bang, the lead single from jessie js album sweet talker, which peaked at number one in the uk and reached number three in the us. with the singles problem, break free, and bang bang, grande joined adele as the only female artist with three top ten singles simultaneously on the billboard hot  as a lead artist.

grande was the musical performer on saturday night live, with chris pratt as the host on september , . that same month, the third single from my everything, love me harder, featuring canadian recording artist the weeknd, was released and peaked at number seven in the united states. the song became her fourth top ten single of , the most by any artist that year. in november , grande was featured in major lazers song all my love from the soundtrack album for the film the hunger games mockingjay  part  . the same month, grande released a christmas song titled santa tell me as a single from the reissue of her first christmas ep, christmas kisses . billboard listed the single among the greatest holiday songs of all time. the following month, she appeared on nicki minajs third album the pinkprint, with the song get on your knees. she later released the fifth and the final single from my everything, one last time, which peaked at number  in the us.in february , grande embarked on her first worldwide concert tour, the honeymoon tour, to further promote my everything, with shows in north america, europe, asia and south america. grande was featured on cashmere cats song adore, which was released in march . in the spring, she signed an exclusive publishing contract with the universal music publishing group, covering her entire music catalog. grande also filmed an episode for the fox broadcasting company reality tv series knock knock live , but the show was canceled before her episode aired. she also gueststarred on several episodes of the fox comedyhorror television series scream queens as sonya herfmann/chanel  from september to november . she recorded the duet e pi ti penso with italian recording artist andrea bocelli, which was released in october  as the lead single from bocellis album cinema , and covered the song zero to hero, originally from the animated film hercules , for the compilation album we love disney . grande also released her second christmas ep, christmas  chill in december .

grande began recording songs for her third studio album, dangerous woman, originally titled moonlight, in . in october of that year, she released the single focus, initially intended as the lead single from the album; the song debuted at number seven on the billboard hot . the next month american singer who is fancy released the single boys like you, which features ariana grande and meghan trainor. she was featured in the remix version of over and over again, a song by english singer nathan sykes from his solo debut studio album unfinished business, which was released in january . grande made a cameo appearance in the comedy film zoolander  starring ben stiller and owen wilson. in march , grande released dangerous woman as the lead single from the retitled album of the same name. the single debuted at number ten on the billboard hot , making her the first artist to have the lead single from each of their first three albums debut in the top ten. the same month, grande appeared as host and musical guest of saturday night live, where she performed dangerous woman and debuted the promotional single be alright, which charted at number  on the billboard hot . grande garnered positive reviews for her appearance on the show, including praise for her impressions of various singers, some of which she had done on the tonight show. grande won an online voting poll on entertainment weekly as the best host of the season. in may , grande appeared on the voice season  finale, performing the second single from the album, into you, which peaked at number  in the united states, and duetted with christina aguilera on dangerous woman. in march , she returned to the show, to join as a coach of the twentyfirst season of the voice; grande became the highestpaid coach in the shows history, earning a reported  million per season. grande did not return for the shows twentysecond season.grande released dangerous woman on may , , which debuted at number two on the billboard . it also debuted at number two in japan, and at number one in several other markets, including australia, the netherlands, ireland, italy, new zealand and the uk. mark savage, writing for bbc news, called the album a mature, confident record. at the summertime ball at londons wembley stadium in june, grande performed three songs from the album as part of her set. in august, grande released a third single from the album, side to side, featuring rapper nicki minaj, her eighth top ten entry on the hot , which peaked at number four on that chart. dangerous woman was nominated for grammy award for best pop vocal album and the title track for best pop solo performance.

in august , grande performed a tribute to the late whitney houston on the season finale of the abc television series greatest hits and headlined the opening night of the second annual billboard hot  music festival, performing a nearly hourlong set of her own songs. aside from music, grande filmed a commercial for tmobile that premiered in october  and played penny pingleton in the nbc television broadcast hairspray live, which aired in december . the same month, grande and stevie wonder appeared on the season finale of the us competition tv series the voice, performing their collaboration faith from the soundtrack of the  animated film sing. faith was nominated for best original song at the th golden globe awards. at the end of the year, grande participated in the jingle ball tour . grande recorded the title track of the soundtrack for the  liveaction remake of disneys  animated film beauty and the beast. the recording was released as a duet with american singer john legend in february . the same month, grande embarked on her third concert tour, the dangerous woman tour, to promote the album. on march , , calvin harris released a song titled heatstroke from his album funk wav bounces vol. , which featured grande, young thug, and pharrell williams. on april , , norwegian dj cashmere cat released the fifth song quit from his debut album  featuring grande.on may , , her concert at manchester arena was the target of a suicide bombinga shrapnelladen homemade bomb detonated by an islamic extremist as people were leaving the arena. the manchester arena bombing caused  deaths and injured hundreds more. grande suspended the remainder of the tour and held a televised benefit concert, one love manchester, on june , helping to raise  million to aid the bombings victims and affected families. the concert featured performances from grande, as well as liam gallagher, robbie williams, justin bieber, katy perry, miley cyrus and other artists. to recognize her efforts, the manchester city council named grande the first honorary citizen of manchester. the tour resumed on june  in paris and ended in september . in august , grande appeared in an apple music carpool karaoke episode, singing musical theatre songs with american entertainer seth macfarlane. in december , billboard magazine named her female artist of the year.

grande began working on songs for her fourth studio album, sweetener, with pharrell williams in , but the events in manchester gave a hard reset to the projects expectations. grande released no tears left to cry as the lead single from sweetener in april , with the song debuting at number three on the billboard hot , making grande the only artist to have debuted the first single from each of her first four albums in the top ten of the hot . in june , she was featured in bed, the second single from nicki minajs fourth studio album queen. the same month, she was featured on troye sivans single dance to this from his sophomore album bloom. the second single, god is a woman, peaked at number  on the hot  and became grandes tenth top ten single in the us. released in august , sweetener debuted at number one on the billboard  and received acclaim from critics. she simultaneously charted nine songs from the album on the hot , along with a collaboration, making her the fourth female artist to reach the tensong mark. grande gave four concerts to promote the album, billed as the sweetener sessions, in new york city, chicago, los angeles, and london between august  and september , . in october , grande participated in the nbc broadcast, a very wicked halloween, singing the wizard and i from the musical wicked. the following month, the bbc aired a onehour special, ariana grande at the bbc, featuring interviews and performances.

in november , grande released the single thank u, next and announced her fifth studio album of the same name. the song debuted at number one on the billboard hot , becoming grandes first chart topping single in the united states, spending seven nonconsecutive weeks atop. since then, it has been certified fivetimes platinum in the united states; the songs music video broke records for mostwatched music video on youtube within  hours of release and fastest vevo video to reach  million views on youtube, both of which were later surpassed by other artists. on spotify, it became the fastest song to reach  million streams  and moststreamed song by a female artist in a hour period, with . million streams, before being surpassed by her own song  rings . later the same month, grande released, in collaboration with youtube, a fourpart docuseries titled ariana grande dangerous woman diaries. it shows behind the scenes and concert footage from grandes dangerous woman tour, including moments from the one love manchester concert, and follows her professional life during the tour and the making of sweetener. the series debuted on november , . by the end of the year, she became the most streamed female artist on spotify, and was named billboards woman of the year. in january , it was announced that grande would be headlining the coachella valley music and arts festival, where she became the youngest and only the fourth female artist ever to headline the festival. it took place april  and april . grande brought a number of guest artists to perform with her, including nsync, p. diddy, nicki minaj and justin bieber. her set has received critical acclaim.grandes second single from thank u, next,  rings, was released on january , , and debuted at number one on the billboard hot  for the week of february , becoming her second single in a row  to top the charts. it made grande the third female artist with multiple numberone debuts after mariah carey  and britney spears  and fifth artist overall after justin bieber and drake. the song broke several streaming and recording industry records. spending eight nonconsecutive weeks at number one, it became grandes most successful song on the chart and one of the best selling singles worldwide. thank u, next was released on february , , and debuted at number one on the billboard  while receiving acclaim from critics. it broke the records for the largest streaming week for a pop album and for a female album in the united states with  million ondemand streams.grande became the first solo artist to occupy the top three spots on the billboard hot  with  rings at number one, her third single break up with your girlfriend, im bored debuting at number two, and her lead single thank u, next rose to number three, and the overall second artist to do so since the beatles did in  when they occupied the top five spots. in the united kingdom, grande became the second female solo artist to simultaneously hold the number one and two spots and the first musical artist to replace herself at number one, twice consecutively. in february , it was reported grande wouldnt attend the grammy awards after she had a disagreement with producers over a potential performance at the ceremony. grande ended up earning her first grammy, for best pop vocal album, for sweetener. the same month, grande won a brit award for international female solo artist. she also embarked on her third headlining tour, the sweetener world tour, to promote both sweetener and thank u, next, which began on march , . grande was nominated for  awards at the  billboard music awards, including top artist. she would win two awards for billboard chart achievement and top female artist on may , . grande performed at the event via a prerecorded performance from her sweetener world tour.in june , grande announced that she coexecutive produced the soundtrack to the film charlies angels; a collaboration with miley cyrus and lana del rey, titled dont call me angel, was released as the lead single on september , . it was later nominated for best original song, at the th satellite awards. in august , she released a single titled boyfriend with pop duo social house. grande cowrote singer normanis debut solo single motivation, which was released on august , . grande won three awards at the  mtv video music awards, including the artist of the year award. she was nominated for  awards in total, including video of the year for thank u, next. grande was featured on the remix of american singer and rapper lizzos song good as hell, which was released on october , . by the end of the year, billboard named grande the most accomplished female artist to debut in the s, while nme named her one of the defining music artists of the decade. she also became the most streamed female artist of the decade on music streaming service spotify. also, forbes ranked her amongst the highestpaid celebrities in , placing at number  on the list, while billboard ranked her as s highestpaid solo musician.

in january , grande received multiple nominations at the  iheartradio music awards, including female artist of the year. the following month, she made a guest appearance in the second season of the american television series kidding, which stars jim carrey. on march , , she appeared on childish gambinos fourth studio album .. on the track time. grande and justin bieber released a collaboration song titled stuck with u on may , ; net proceeds from the sales of the song were donated to the first responders childrens foundation in light of the covid pandemic. the song debuted at number one on the billboard hot , becoming grandes third charttopping single. alongside bieber, both artists tied mariah carey and drake for the most songs to debut at number one on the hot ; grande is the first artist to have her first three number ones debut at the top, following thank u, next and  rings. grande also released a collaboration with lady gaga, rain on me, as the second single from gagas sixth studio album chromatica. the song also debuted at number one on the billboard hot , becoming grandes fourth numberone single and helping grande break the record for the most numberone debuts on that chart. the song won the best pop duo/group performance category at the rd annual grammy awards. in , grande became the highestearning woman in music on forbess  celebrity  list, placing th overall with  million. at the  mtv video music awards, she was nominated for nine awards for both stuck with u  and rain on me . for the latter, grande received her third consecutive nomination for video of the year. she won four awards, including song of the year for rain on me.grandes sixth studio album, positions, was released on october , . it debuted at number one on the billboard , becoming grandes fifth numberone album. the eponymous lead single was released on october . it debuted at number one on the billboard hot , becoming grandes fifth charttopping single and breaking numerous records. grande became the first artist to have five numberone debuts on the hot  and the first to have their first five number ones debut at the top. positions became her third numberone single in  following stuck with u and rain on me, making grande the first artist since drake to have three numberone singles in a single calendar year and the first female artist to do so since rihanna and katy perry in . alongside the release of positions, the song from the album  served as the second single off the album. the song debuted at number , becoming grandes th top ten single. grande released a  remix featuring american rappers doja cat and megan thee stallion on january , . the remix helped the song reach a new peak at number two, the highestcharting song credited to three or more female soloists on the hot  since christina aguilera, ma, pink and lil kims lady marmalade in . the remix was one of five additional tracks included on the deluxe edition of positions, released on february , . in march, the song pov was sent to radio as the albums third single. the song reached number  on the hot  and would reach the top ten on mainstream radio, making grande the first artist to have three concurrent songs in the top ten for pop airplay. grande was named the mostplayed artist on iheartradios stations in , reaching . billion in audience.in december , grande appeared in adam mckays film dont look up, alongside leonardo dicaprio, jennifer lawrence, and meryl streep. with streams of more than  million hours in a week, it broke the record for the biggest week of views in netflix history. to promote the film, grande released the song just look up, in collaboration with rapper kid cudi, on december , . at the th critics choice awards, grande received nominations in the categories best song and best acting ensemble, as a part of the cast. she also received a nomination at the th screen actors guild awards for outstanding performance by a cast in a motion picture. on november , , grande made a surprise appearance on the adult swim festival, performing alongside music artist thundercat, performing his song them changes, which grande had previously covered. grande and jennifer hudson also featured on a remix of mariah careys  christmas song oh santa. the song was released on december , , as part of mariah careys magical christmas special. grande released the concert film for her sweetener world tour, excuse me, i love you, on december , , exclusively on netflix.in april, grande was featured on a remix of the weeknds save your tears. the remix reached number one on the billboard hot , becoming both artists sixth number one single. she joined paul mccartney as the only artist to earn three numberone duets on the hot . the remix also became, with  weeks, one of the songs with the most total weeks on the chart. grande and the weeknd performed save your tears together at the  iheartradio music awards. on february , , following monthslong renewed interest in and virality of the weeknds  song die for you, a remix of the song with grande was released. the remix marked their fourth collaboration. in the billboard hot  issue dated march , , the remix reached the top of the chart, becoming both artists seventh number one hit. in june, grande featured on the song i dont do drugs from doja cats third studio album planet her. her contribution as a songwriter and featured artist on the song earned grande a nomination for album of the year at the th annual grammy awards. later that month, she debuted seven live performances on vevo. grande performed virtually as the headline act of the rift tour on the video game fortnite from august  to , . forbes estimated that grande would earn over  million from merchandise sales alone. the concert attracted  million players, beating travis scotts record of . million views for his own concert, and helped fuel a spike in streams for the songs included in her set.in november , it was announced that grande would play glinda for the upcoming twopart film adaptation of the musical wicked, directed by jon m. chu and starring alongside cynthia erivo, who will play elphaba. the first part, wicked part one, is slated to be released on november , .on august , , grande released a reissue of her debut studio album, yours truly .

grandes music is generally pop and rb with elements of edm, hip hop, and trap, the latter first appearing prominently on her christmas  chill extended play. while consistently maintaining poprb tones, she has increased incorporation of trap into her music as her career has progressed, thanks to her work with record producer tommy brown. she has collaborated with brown on every album thus far and stated that one of the things i love most about working with tommy is that none of the beats he plays me ever sound the same. grande learned how to sound engineer and produce her own vocals because she loves being hands on with every project, revealing that mac miller taught her how to use the digital audio workstation pro tools. collaborator justin tranter remarked that he felt inspired seeing how involved grande is in creating her music from the writing to the vision to the storytelling and to even engineering and comping her own vocals. she has cowritten songs addressing a wide variety of themes, such as love, sex, wealth, breakups, independence, empowerment, selflove and moving on from the past.grandes debut album yours truly was complimented for recreating the rb vibe and feel of the s with the help of songwriter and producer babyface. her followup record, my everything, was described as an evolution to a new sound exploring edm and electropop genres. grande expanded the pop and rb sound on her third album, dangerous woman, which was praised by the los angeles times for integrating elements of different styles, including reggaepop , dancepop , and guitartrap fusion . trappop is more heavily featured on her fourth and fifth studio albums, sweetener and thank u, next. on sweetener, elias leight of rolling stone opines that grande set her sights on conquering trap, savage basslines and jittery swarms of drum programming and embraces the sound of hardbitten southern hiphop, exploring funk music with themes of love and prosperity. craig jenkins of vulture noted that grande changed her musical style to trap and hip hop with undertones of rb on thank u, next, with lyrics about breakups, empowerment, and selflove. her sixth album, positions, further explores the rb and trappop sound of sweetener and thank u, next, with lyrics discussing sex and romance.

grande grew up listening mainly to urban pop and s music. she credited gloria estefan with inspiring her to pursue a music career after estefan saw and complimented grandes performance on a cruise ship when she was eight years old. mariah carey and whitney houston are her biggest vocal influences i love mariah carey. she is literally my favorite human being on the planet. and of course whitney houston as well. as far as vocal influences go, whitney and mariah pretty much cover it. alongside carey and houston, grandes other key influences include destinys child, beyonc, celine dion and madonna. she reflects on her childhood by posting videos of herself singing songs from dions  album lets talk about love on her social media. grande credits madonna for paving the way for me and also every other female artist and admitted to being obsessed with her entire discography.grande praised imogen heaps intricate song structure. she has named judy garland as a childhood influence, admiring her ability to tell a story when she sings; and says that over the rainbow was one of the first songs she remembers singing because wizard of oz was always my favorite movie when i was younger. music producer and grande collaborator savan kotecha has stated in multiple interviews that he and grande were influenced by lauryn hill, when creating her fourth album sweetener, as well as the song no tears left to cry. kotecha told variety we were listening to lauryn hill about chord changes and why we stick to four chords all the time.musically, grande admires india.arie because her music makes me feel like everything is going to be okay and loves brandys songs because her riffs are incredibly on point. she has also expressed admiration for rappers who impact the music industry without a planned release date, telling billboard, my dream has always been to beobviously not a rapper, but, like, to put out music in the way that a rapper does. i feel like there are certain standards that pop women are held to that men arent. ... its just like, bruh, i just want to ... drop music the way these boys do. it inspired her to release thank u, next without any prior announcement, which the ringer called more of a drake move than an ariana grande move.

grande has been described as a soprano, possessing a fouroctave vocal range and a whistle register. with the release of yours truly, critics compared grande to mariah carey because of her wide vocal range, sound, and musical material. julianne escobedo shepherd of billboard wrote that both carey and grande have the talent to let their vocals do the talking ... thats not where the similarities end. ... grande is subverting it with cute, comfortable, and ontrend dresses with a feminine slant. grande responded to the comparisons, its a huge compliment, but when you hear my entire album, youll see that mariahs sound is much different than mine. steven j. horowitz of billboard wrote in , with her sophomore album, the problem singer no longer resembles careyand thats okay.mark savage of bbc news commented, grande is one of pops most intriguing and gifted singers. a magnetic performer with unrivalled vocal control. in the new york times, jon pareles wrote that grandes voice can be silky, breathy or cutting, swooping through long melismas or jabbing out short rb phrases; its always supple and airborne, never forced. composer and playwright jason robert brown addressed grande in a  time magazine article no matter how much you are underestimated ... you are going to open your mouth and that unbelievable sound is going to come out. that extraordinary, versatile, limitless instrument that allows you to shut down every objection and every obstacle.

grande cited audrey hepburn as a major style influence in her early years of fame, but began to find emulating hepburns style a little boring as her career progressed. she also drew inspiration from actresses of the s and s, such as annmargret, nancy sinatra and marilyn monroe. grandes modest look early in her career was described as age appropriate in comparison to contemporary artists who grew up in the public eye. jim farber of the new york daily news wrote in  that grande received less attention for how little she wears or how graphically she moves than for how she sings. that year, she abandoned her earlier style and began wearing short skirts and crop tops with kneehigh boots in live performances and red carpet events. she also began regularly wearing cat and bunny ears. in recent years, she began wearing oversized jackets and hoodies. grandes style is often imitated by social media influencers and celebrities. after years of dyeing her hair red for the role of cat valentine, grande wore extensions as her hair recovered from the damage. anne t. donahue of mtv news noted that her iconic high ponytail has received more attention than her fashion choices.although grande drew criticism for alleged impolite interactions with reporters and fans in , she dismissed the reports as weird, inaccurate depictions. rolling stone wrote some may cry diva, but its also grande just taking a stand to not allow others to control her image. in july , grande sparked controversy after being seen on surveillance video in a doughnut shop licking doughnuts that were on display and saying i hate americans. i hate america. this is disgusting, referring to a tray of doughnuts. she subsequently apologized, saying that she is extremely proud to be an american and that her comments rather referred to obesity in the united states. she later released a video apology for behaving poorly. the incident was parodied by the muppets and featured in miley cyruss saturday night live cover of my way, about the regrets of the summer of . grande herself poked fun at the incident while hosting saturday night live in , saying, a lot of kid stars end up doing drugs, or in jail, or pregnant, or get caught licking a doughnut they didnt pay for. in , she said that she stopped doing interviews for a while out of fear that her words would be misconstrued and she would be labeled a diva.

grande has a large following on social media, and is one of the most influential celebrities on the internet. as of january , her youtube channel has over  million subscribers, making her among the most subscribed solo female artist; her music videos have been viewed a total of over  billion times, with seven of them reaching one billion views; her spotify profile has amassed over  million followers, making her the second most followed artist and most followed female; her instagram account has over  million followers, making her the sixth most followed individual and thirdmost followed female; her now deactivated twitter account had over  million followers, making it the seventh most followed account; her facebook page has over  million followers, and her tiktok has . million followers. grande was the most followed woman on instagram from  to . in may , visual capitalist ranked grande as the worlds top female social media influencer.often regarded as a pop icon and triple threat entertainer, several wax figures of grande are found at madame tussauds wax museums in major cities around the world, including new york, orlando, amsterdam, bangkok, hollywood and london.

in  and , grande was named one of times  most influential people in the world. in , celia almeida of the miami new times wrote that of all the biggest pop stars of the past  years, grande made the most convincing transition from ingnue to an independent female artist. in , music magazine hits labeled her pop diva supreme and reigning pop diva of the times, and bloomberg named her the first pop diva of the streaming generation in .grande was also included in pitchforks list of the  most important artists of pitchforks first  years for emerging with music that pushed her artistry further as it asserted a magical trifecta of hope, joy, and a powerhouse voice. her song thank u, next was in rolling stones  revision of their  greatest songs of all time. in , the magazine included grande among the  greatest singers of all time.many recording artists have cited grande as an influence, including madison beer, sufjan stevens, melanie martinez, meghan trainor, troye sivan, jungkook from bts, maria becerra, billie eilish, yeri from red velvet, sabrina carpenter, danna paola, zara larsson, melody, bryson tiller, lana del rey, dove cameron, michelle zauner from japanese breakfast, grace vanderwaal, breanna yde, maggie lindemann, charlie puth, and giselle from aespa.

throughout her career, grande has sold over  to  million records worldwide, making her one of the bestselling music artists of all time. all of grandes fulllength albums have been certified platinum or higher by the riaa and they spend at least one year on the billboard  chart, and she has sold over  million units, across albums, singles, and features , and  million albums and . million digital singles units as lead artist in the united states. in the u.s., grande has moved . million album units, and garnered over . billion streams across lead artist credits, according to luminate.having amassed  billion streams thus far, grande is the most streamed female artist as of  and one of the most streamed artists of all time; she is the most streamed female artist on spotify for the s decade and apple music. grande is with over  billion streams among the top ten of the most streamed artists, being only one of two female artists on the ranking. she became the most streamed female artist on spotify, surpassing rihanna, and held the record for over two years, after being overtaken herself. her songs and albums are some of the most streamed of all time. grande became the first woman with one and two billion streams with one album, . billion streams on three separate albums, the first artist to have five albums with four billion streams. she also has ten songs that have overcome one billion streams. as of , shes also the most followed female artist on spotify.grande has won two grammy awards, one brit award, nine mtv video music awards, three mtv europe music awards and three american music awards. she has received  billboard music award nominations and won two in , including top female artist. grande has won nine nickelodeon kids choice awards, including one in  for favorite tv actress for her performance on sam  cat, and three peoples choice awards. in , she received the breakthrough artist of the year award from the music business association and best newcomer at the bambi awards. she has won six iheartradio music awards and twelve teen choice awards. she was named billboard women in musics rising star in  and woman of the year in , the greatest pop star of , with honorable mention in  and , and the most successful female artist to debut in the s by billboard. she is the sixth highestcertified female digital singles artist in the u.s., with . million total equivalent units certified by the recording industry association of america . grande is also one of the most certified artists in the uk, with nearly  million units.grande has broken numerous hot  records. seven singles by grande have topped the us billboard hot , her most recent being die for you. grande has a total of fourteen top ten debuts thus far, beginning with her first single the way; the lead single from each of her first five studio albums have debuted in the top ten, making her the only artist to achieve this. in , she became the first act to have her first five number one singles, thank u, next,  rings, stuck with u, rain on me, and positions debut at number one; that year, grande also broke the record for the most number one debuts and became the first female artist topping global , global  excl. us and hot  simultaneously. grande would also become the first artist to have three singles debut at number one on a single calendar year. she later broke the record for most simultaneously charting songs on the top  of the hot  for a female artist with the release of her fifth studio album, thank u, next, when eleven of the twelve tracks charted within the region . the three singles from thank u, next,  rings, break up with your girlfriend, im bored, and thank u, next charted at numbers one, two, and three respectively on the week of february , , making grande the first solo artist to occupy the top three spots of the billboard hot  and the first artist to do so since the beatles in . with her album thank u, next, grande set the record for the largest streaming week for a pop album and for a female artist, with  million ondemand audio streams. with die for you with the weeknd reaching number one, grande surpassed paul mccartney as the artist with the most numberone duets in hot  history, with four songs. as of march , grande has  entries on the hot , tying aretha franklin as the fourth female artist with the most  entries. she was also named the billboard yearend top female artist for  and  and was named the sixth top female artist  on the magazines decadeend top artists chart for the s. the magazine also ranked her th on the greatest of all time hot  artists charts, respectively.as of , grande has broken thirty guinness world records. these records included the most songs to debut at no.  on the billboard hot , most followers on spotify , most monthly listeners on spotify , most streamed act on spotify , most streamed track in one week by a female artist on the billboard charts, fastest hattrick of uk no.  singles by a female artist, first female artist to replace herself at no.  on uk singles chart, first solo artist to replace themselves at no.  on uk singles chart for two consecutive weeks, most subscribers for a musician on youtube , most streamed album by a female artist in one week , among others. eleven records were achieved from the success of her album thank u, next which was featured in the  edition.

at age ten, grande cofounded the south florida youth singing group kids who care, which performed at charitable fundraisers and raised over , in  alone. in , as a member of the charitable organization broadway in south africa, she and her brother frankie performed and taught music and dance to children in gugulethu, south africa.she was featured with bridgit mendler and kat graham in seventeen magazine in a  public campaign to end online bullying called delete digital drama. after watching the film blackfish that year, she urged fans to stop supporting seaworld. in september , grande participated at the charitable stand up to cancer television program, performing her song my everything in memory of her grandfather, who had died of cancer that july. grande has adopted several rescue dogs as pets and has promoted pet adoption at her concerts. in , she launched a line of lip shades, ariana grandes mac viva glam, with mac cosmetics, the profits of which benefited people affected by hiv and aids.in , grande and miley cyrus performed a cover of crowded houses dont dream its over as part of cyrus backyard sessions to benefit her happy hippie foundation, which helps homeless and lgbt youths. later that year, grande headlined the dance on the pier event, part of the lgbt pride week in new york city. as a feminist, grande wrote a wellreceived, empowering essay on twitter decrying the double standard and misogyny in the focus of the press on female musicians relationships and sex lives instead of their value as an individual. she noted that she has more to talk about concerning her music and accomplishments rather than her romantic relationships. in , e writer kendall fisher called her a feminist hero. that year, grande joined madonna to raise funds for orphaned children in malawi; she and victoria mont recorded better days in support of the black lives matter movement. to aid the victims of the manchester arena bombing in , grande organized the one love manchester concert and rereleased one last time and her live performance of over the rainbow at the event as charity singles. the total amount raised was reportedly  million , and she received praise for her grace and strength in leading the benefit concert. madeline roth of mtv wrote that the performance bolstered courage among an audience that desperately needed it. ... returning to the stage was a true act of bravery and resilience. in , new york magazines vulture section ranked the event as the no.  concert of the year, and billboards mitchell harrison called grande a gay icon for her lgbtfriendly lyrics and performances and support for the lgbtq community.in september , grande performed in a concert for charlottesville which benefitted the victims of the august  white nationalist rally in charlottesville, virginia. in march , she participated in march for our lives to support gun control reform. grande donated the proceeds from the first show in atlanta on her sweetener world tour to planned parenthood in a response to the passage of a number of antiabortion laws in several states including georgia. during the covid pandemic, grande donated between  and , each to a number of fans as financial support. grande also supported a covid fund named project , which aimed to provide , digital payments to , families who have been greatly impacted by the pandemic. in may , grande announced that all net proceeds from her collaboration with singer justin bieber, stuck with u, would be donated to the first responders childrens foundation to fund grants and scholarships for children of frontline workers who are working during the global pandemic. that month, grande joined a los angeles protest against the murder of george floyd, demanding justice and asking fans to sign petitions condemning the act of police brutality. she highlighted white privilege and called for more activism outside social media. the following month, she praised a blackowned coffee shop on instagram, and encouraged her labased followers to support the business. in recent years, grande surprised kids, who spend the holiday at childrens hospitals in l.a. and the uk, with gifts from wish lists at the ucla mattel childrens hospital and the royal manchester childrens hospital, among others. manchester foundation trust charity revealed that grande had gifted nearly , presents to patients across the hospital networks childrens wards and newborn intensive care units in .in june , grande, along with a dozen other celebrities signed an open letter to congress to pass the equality act highlighting the act would protect marginalized communities. in the same month, grande partnered with the online portal betterhelp, and gave away  million worth of therapy to fans. on international transgender day of visibility in , she launched the protect  defend trans youth fund to benefit transgender youth, pledging to match every donation up until . million. in may , grande was among  artists and influencers, who signed a bans off our bodies fullpage advertisement in the new york times, in support of abortion rights in the us. grande was also one of  entertainers to sign an open letter to oppose books bans in us schools in .  in june , grande endorsed karen bass for  los angeles mayoral election.

in november , she released a limited edition handbag in collaboration with coach. in january , she launched a makeup collection with mac cosmetics, donating  of proceeds to the mac aids fund. in february , grande launched a fashion line with lipsy london. later that year, she teamed up with brookstone, using the concept art of artist wenqing yan, to design cat ear headphones. in , grande collaborated with square enix to create a character based on herself for the mobile game final fantasy brave exvius. grande was a limitedtime unlockable character as part of the dangerous woman tour event, which also included an orchestral remix of grandes song touch it; the character, dangerous ariana, is a magical support character who uses musicbased attacks. in september , she became a brand ambassador for reebok. in august , she partnered with american express for the sweetener sessions, a partnership which continued through the sweetener world tour in , alongside tmobile. in march , she partnered with starbucks for the launch of the cloud macchiato beverage. in may , grande was announced as the face of givenchys fallwinter campaign. the campaign began in july and generated . million in media impact value. beats, samsung, fiat, reebok, and guess products have been featured in grandes music videos. she has appeared in commercials for macys, tmobile, and apple, as well as for her own fragrances. since , grande was among the ten of the highest paid individuals on instagram. in , grande earns . million per sponsored instagram post.

grande has released thirteen fragrances with luxe brands. she launched her debut fragrance, ari by ariana grande, in . in the wake of its success, she launched her third fragrance, sweet like candy, in . her fifth fragrance, moonlight, was released in , followed by cloud , thank u, next , r.e.m. , and god is a woman , which was later expanded to a body care line. she then released the duo fragrance collection mod vanilla and mod blush . the line also includes the limited editions frankie , sweet like candy limited edition , thank u, next ., cloud intense , and cloud pink . the fragrances won the fifi award multiple times, most recently with r.e.m. in . in , it was reported that cloud was the bestselling fragrance at ulta, selling one bottle every eleven minutes. grandes fragrance line is the mostsearched celebrity offering, with . million searches across google and social media platforms per year. since its launch in , the franchise has made  billion in retail sales globally.

in november , grande launched her makeup line r.e.m. beauty, which is distributed at ulta beauty as of march . the chapter one ultraviolet line featured  core products, including a range of individual shades, for both lips and eyes. in march , grande released the brands chapter two goodnight and go line. in addition to a selection of new skincare productsan undereye balm, lash and brow serum, and face mistthe collection also contained makeup staples such as versatile cheek and lipstick and additional sets of eyelash extensions. she then released chapter  on your collar, which included various lip products, and chapter   out of body, which included a concealer available in  different shades. forbes reported in  that r.e.m. beauty was one of the brands boosting ultas driving gross margin due to strong consumer demand. in may, the line won best new brand at the allure best of beauty awards. in february , it was announced, that the brand will be launching in  sephora stores and  online sites, including across europe.in january , forbes announced that grande is set to acquire the physical assets for the brand, for an estimated  million from forma brandsthe parent company of morphe cosmeticsafter the company filed for bankruptcy earlier that month, ending their licensing agreement.

grande has said she struggled with hypoglycemia, which she attributed to poor dietary habits. she has been a vegan since . fans questioned in  whether she was still a vegan after working with starbucks to create a special edition of one of her favorite drinks which was revealed to contain eggs. her nutritionist, harley pasternak, told the magazine glamour that grande is vegan but that he has got her to feel ok about indulging and celebrating sometimes.grande developed posttraumatic stress disorder  and anxiety after the manchester arena bombing; she nearly pulled out of her performance in the  broadcast a very wicked halloween due to anxiety. grande has also said she has been in therapy for over a decade, having first seen a mental health professional shortly after her parents divorce.grande was raised roman catholic, but left the church during the pontificate of benedict xvi , opposing its stance on homosexuality and noting that her halfbrother frankie is gay. grande stated that she and frankie later visited a kabbalah centre and that they both really had a connection with it. several of her songs, such as break your heart right back, are supportive of lgbt rights. she has also been labeled an advocate for a sexpositive attitude. in november , grande endorsed bernie sanders second presidential bid.forbes began reporting on grandes earnings in july . she purchased a mansion in hollywood hills  for . million in june . grande owned a penthouse in lower manhattan, that sold for . million, in . in september , grande put her montecito, california house, which had a breakin three months before, up for sale. the mansion was reported to have sold for . million.

grande met actor graham phillips in the cast of the broadway musical  in  and dated him until . she dated english singer nathan sykes between august and december , and then dated rapper big sean from october  to april .after recording the way with mac miller in , the two began dating in . they collaborated on the single my favorite part, released in september  on millers album the divine feminine . their relationship ended by may . that september, miller died from an accidental drug overdose; grande expressed grief over his death on social media and called him her dearest friend.in may , grande began dating actor and comedian pete davidson, and they became engaged the next month. they called off their engagement and ended the relationship in october .grande began dating real estate agent dalton gomez in january . their relationship, while mostly private, was made public in the music video of her and justin biebers charity single stuck with u. grande announced their engagement on december , , after  months of dating. on may , , they married in a private ceremony at her home in montecito, california, where she wore a custom vera wang dress. her wedding pictures became among the mostliked instagram posts, with over  million likes. the couple separated in , with their divorce settled in october of that year.

snowflake, the white gorilla 

underdogs 

zoolander  

mariah careys magical christmas special 

ariana grande excuse me, i love you 

billie eilish the worlds a little blurry 

dont look up 

studio albums

yours truly 

my everything 

dangerous woman 

sweetener 

thank u, next 

positions 

the listening sessions 

the honeymoon tour 

dangerous woman tour 

sweetener world tour 

the sweetener sessions 

justin bieber  believe tour 

robyn rihanna fenty  is a barbadian singer, songwriter, businesswoman, and actress. she is widely regarded as one of the most prominent singers of the st century. after signing with def jam in , rihanna soon gained recognition with the release of her first two studio albums, music of the sun  and a girl like me , both of which were influenced by caribbean music and peaked within the top ten on the us billboard  chart. her third album, good girl gone bad , incorporated elements of dancepop and established her status as a major icon in the music industry. the charttopping single umbrella earned rihanna her first grammy award and catapulted her to global stardom.

rihanna continued to mix pop, dance, and rb genres on her next studio albums, rated r , loud , talk that talk , and unapologetic , the last of which became her first billboard  number one. the albums spawned a string of charttopping singles, including rude boy, only girl , whats my name, sm, we found love, and diamonds. her eighth album, anti , showcased a new creative control following her departure from def jam. it became her second us number one album and featured the charttopping single work. during her musical career, rihanna has collaborated with many artists, such as drake, eminem, jayz, kanye west, neyo, and shakira.

with sales of over  million records worldwide, rihanna is the secondbestselling female music artist of all time and the highestcertified female artist of all time on the riaas top artists  ranking. she has achieved  numberone singles,  topten singles in the us, and  topten entries in the uk. her accolades include nine grammy awards,  american music awards ,  billboard music awards, five world music awards, six guinness world records, the naacps presidents award, and an academy award nomination. her acclaimed super bowl halftime show performance in  is the most watched in history. time named her one of the  most influential people in the world in  and . forbes ranked her among the top ten highestpaid celebrities in  and . as of , she is the wealthiest female musician, with an estimated net worth of . billion.aside from music, rihanna is known for her involvement in humanitarian causes, entrepreneurial ventures, and the fashion industry. she is the founder of the nonprofit organization clara lionel foundation, cosmetics brand fenty beauty, and fashion house fenty under lvmh; she is the first black woman to head a luxury brand for lvmh. rihanna has also ventured into acting, appearing in major roles in battleship , home , valerian and the city of a thousand planets , and oceans  . she was appointed as an ambassador of education, tourism, and investment by the government of barbados in  and was declared a national hero of barbados on the first day of the countrys parliamentary republic in , entitling her to the style of the right excellent for life.

robyn rihanna fenty was born on february , , in saint michael, barbados. she is the daughter of accountant monica  and warehouse supervisor ronald fenty. her mother is an afroguyanese, while her father is a barbadian of african, irish, english, and scottish descent. rihanna has two brothers, rorrey and rajad fenty, and two halfsisters and a halfbrother from her fathers side, each born to different mothers from his previous relationships. she grew up in a threebedroom bungalow in bridgetown and sold clothes with her father in a stall on the street. her childhood was deeply affected by her fathers alcoholism and crack cocaine addiction, which contributed to her parents strained marriage. rihannas father used to abuse her mother physically, and rihanna would try to get in between them to break up fights.as a child, rihanna had many ct scans for the excruciating headaches she suffered, recalling, the doctors even thought it was a tumor, because it was that intense. by the time she was , her parents had divorced, and her health began to improve. she grew up listening to reggae music. she attended charles f. broome memorial primary school and combermere school, where she studied alongside future international cricketers chris jordan and carlos brathwaite. at age , rihanna was a cadet in barbados cadet corps; the later barbadian singersongwriter shontelle was her drill sergeant. she initially wanted to graduate from high school, though chose to pursue a musical career instead.

in , rihanna formed a musical trio with two of her classmates in her home country of barbados. without a name or any material, the girl group auditioned with american record producer evan rogers, who commented, the minute rihanna walked into the room, it was like the other two girls didnt exist. rihanna went to rogerss hotel room, where she performed renditions of destinys childs emotion and mariah careys hero. impressed, rogers scheduled a second meeting with rihannas mother present and then invited rihanna to his hometown in the united states to record some demo tapes that could be sent to record labels. recordings were intermittent, taking about a year because she was only able to record during school holidays. pon de replay and the last time were two tracks recorded for the demo tape, which were eventually included on her debut album music of the sun. that same year, rihanna was signed to rogerss and carl sturkens production company, syndicated rhythm productions.rihannas demo was shipped out to def jam recordings, where jay brown, an ar executive at the record label, was one of the first to hear the demo. brown played the demo tape for rapper jayz, who had recently been appointed as president and ceo of def jam. when jayz first heard the track pon de replay, he felt the song was too big for her. despite being skeptical, he invited rihanna to audition for the label. in early , rihanna auditioned for def jam in new york city, where jayz introduced her to music mogul antonio l.a. reid. at the audition, she sang whitney houstons cover of for the love of you, as well as the demo tracks pon de replay and the last time. jayz was absolutely certain about signing her after she performed her future single pon de replay. his boss, l.a. reid, was also impressed with her audition, telling jayz not to let rihanna leave the building until the contract was signed. reid left it to jayz and his team to close the deal which resulted in a sixalbum record deal with def jam. she waited in jayzs office until  in the morning to get lawyers to draft up a contract because he wanted to prevent her from signing with another label.

rihanna canceled other meetings with record labels and relocated from barbados to the united states to live with rogers and his wife.

after signing with def jam, jayz and his team did the ar for rihannas debut album and spent the next three months recording and completing her debut album. she worked with different producers to complete her debut studio album, primarily rogers and his production partner carl sturken. with several songs to pick as a lead single, pon de replay was chosen because it seemed like the best song suited for a summer release. in may , her debut single, pon de replay, was released under her mononym rihanna. it charted successfully worldwide, peaking in the top five in fifteen countries, including at no.  on the us billboard hot  chart and the uk singles chart. the song became a club hit in the united states, peaking at no.  on the billboard dance club songs.music of the sun was released in august . it debuted at no.  on the billboard  and received a gold certification from the recording industry association of america , denoting shipments of over , units. the album sold over  million copies worldwide. a second single, if its lovin that you want, was not as successful as its predecessor, but reached the top  in australia, ireland and new zealand. aside from her work in music, rihanna made her acting debut in a cameo role in the successful straighttodvd film bring it on all or nothing, released in august .a month after the release of her debut album, rihanna began working on her second studio album. a girl like me was released in april . rolling stone felt that the burning rock guitar and haunted strings of some of the albums tracks made a girl like me ... likable. the album was a commercial success, charting in the top  in  countries. the album reached no.  in canada and no.  in the united kingdom and the united states, where it sold , copies in its first week. the album became rihannas first to be certified platinum by the riaa, after selling over ,, units. its lead single, sos, was an international success, charting in the top five in  countries. the song reached no.  on the us billboard hot  and in australia, her first to reach this chart position. unfaithful, the albums second single, reached the top  in  countries, including no.  in canada and switzerland. two more singles were released from the album we ride and break it off.

in early , rihanna appeared on the single roll it with jamaican band jstatus and fellow barbadian singersongwriter shontelle. the song appeared on jstatus debut album the beginning, released in several european countries only. around that time, rihanna had already begun work on her third studio album, good girl gone bad. with the help of producers timbaland, tricky stewart and sean garrett she embraced a new musical direction through uptempo dance tracks. released in may , the album charted at no.  in australia and the us and topped the charts in multiple countries, including brazil, canada, ireland and the uk. the album received the most positive critical reviews of her first three albums.

the lead single, umbrella, topped the charts in  countries and remained at no.  in the uk for  consecutive weeks, the longestrunning no.  single there since wet wet wets single love is all around spent  weeks at the top in . it was rihannas first single to be named one of the bestselling singles worldwide, with sales of over  million copies. the songs shut up and drive, hate that i love you , and dont stop the music were also released as singles, with the latter becoming an international hit. in support of the album, rihanna began the good girl gone bad tour in september , with  shows across the us, canada, and europe. rihanna was nominated for several  grammy awards for good girl gone bad, winning best rap/sung collaboration for umbrella alongside jayz, her first grammy award.on june , , rihanna released good girl gone bad live, her first live longform video. the dvd and bluray release featured rihannas concert at the manchester arena in manchester, united kingdom, held on december , , as part of the good girl gone bad tour. the release also contained a special documentary that presented rihanna discussing her experiences during the tour. by late , rihanna still remained on the charts with the release of the fifth single from good girl gone bad, rehab, and was named diva of the year by entertainment weekly for her newfound staying power. good girl gone bad has sold over . million units in the united states alone, receiving a twotimesplatinum certification from the riaa. it is rihannas bestselling album in the country to date. the album has sold  million units worldwide.during the late s, rihanna experimented further with pop, dubstep, and rock music, officially shifting her musical style and image away from the barbados island girl. throughout , rihanna performed on the glow in the dark tour alongside kanye west, lupe fiasco, and n.e.r.d. her third studio albums reissue, good girl gone bad reloaded, was released in june  with three new songs disturbia, take a bow and the maroon  duet if i never see your face again, plus a spanglish version of hate that i love you featuring spanish pop singer david bisbal. all four were released as singles and charted highly, reaching peak positions worldwide. in august , rihanna and a host of other female singers recorded the charity single just stand up, the theme song to the anticancer campaign stand up to cancer. live your life, a duet between t.i. and rihanna, was released that november and topped the billboard hot .

on february , , rihannas scheduled performance at the st annual grammy awards was canceled.

reports surfaced that thenboyfriend, singer chris brown, had physically assaulted her. he was arrested on suspicion of making criminal threats. on march , , brown was charged with assault and making criminal threats. a leaked photograph from the police department obtained by tmz.com revealed that rihanna had sustained visible injuries.

a few months after the incident, rihanna was featured on the single run this town by jayz, which also featured kanye west and was released as the second single from jayzs eleventh studio album the blueprint .in early , rihanna began working on her fourth studio album, rated r. rated r was released in november . the album had rolling stone magazine stating that rihanna transformed her sound and made one of the best pop records of the year.rated r featured a darker and more foreboding tone than rihannas previous albums.rated r debuted at no.  on the us billboard  chart.

the album was supported by six singles, including rude boy, which was the biggest worldwide success from the album, topping the us billboard hot  for six weeks and reaching top  positions in  other countries.

in january , rihanna released her charity cover version of redemption song for the  hope for haiti now campaign. she also recorded the song stranded  together with jayz, bono and the edge for the same campaign to alleviate the  haiti earthquake.

in summer , rihanna collaborated with rapper eminem on love the way you lie, which was a major worldwide success, reaching no.  in over  countries. reaching number , the song became the biggestselling song of  in the uk and the first of rihannas singles to sell over a million copies in the country. in october , rihanna switched managers, joining jayzs roc nation management. in late , she was featured on three singles kanye wests all of the lights, from the album my beautiful dark twisted fantasy , nicki minajs fly, from her debut studio album pink friday  and david guettas whos that chick, from the album one more love .loud, rihannas fifth studio album, was released in november .

the album produced three us billboard hot s. its lead single, only girl , whats my name, featuring rapper drake and sm, following the release of its official remix featuring britney spears. rihanna set a record as the solo artist with the fastest accumulation of  chart toppers in the hot s history. at the rd grammy awards, only girl  won the award for best dance recording.man down and california king bed were released as singles in may  with moderate success. cheers , which interpolates avril lavignes  single im with you, was released as the seventh and final single from the album. to promote the album, rihanna embarked on her loud tour in june , which sold out  nights at the o arena in west london, the most soldout shows for a female artist in the venues history. the tour was the seventh highestgrossing tour worldwide of . in september  she put her st johns wood, north london house for sale with a price of  million.

rihannas sixth album, talk that talk, was released in november . the album debuted at no.  in the u.s. and number no.  in the uk the albums lead single, we found love, topped charts in twentyseven countries and peaked in the top  in  countries and broke many chart records worldwide. the single topped the billboard hot  for  nonconsecutive weeks, becoming rihannas longestrunning no.  single on the chart and the longestrunning no.  single of  in the us. the song was later named the th biggest hit of all time on the billboard hot . you da one and the albums title track, featuring jayz, were released as the second and third singles, to moderate success. where have you been, the fifth single, successfully charted worldwide, reaching no.  in the us and no.  in the uk. cockiness  was released as the albums sixth and final single in a remixed form featuring rapper asap rocky.

in early , two collaborations featuring rihanna were released coldplays princess of china, from their album mylo xyloto, and drakes take care, from his album of the same name. in february , rihanna won her third grammy award for best rap/sung collaboration at the  grammy awards for her kanye west collaboration all of the lights and was voted the best international female solo artist at the  brit awards for the second consecutive year. march  saw the simultaneous releases of two collaborations between rihanna and chris brown remixes of her song birthday cake and his turn up the music. the recordings received mainly negative responses due to the pairs history of domestic violence. in september , we found love won the mtv video music award for video of the year, making rihanna the first woman to receive the accolade more than once.rihannas seventh studio album, unapologetic, was released in november . in the united states, the album debuted at no.  on the billboard  albums chart, marking rihannas first no.  album in the country. the lead single from the album, diamonds, reached no.  in more than  countries worldwide, including on the us billboard hot , where it became rihannas  no.  on the chart. the albums second single, stay, featuring mikky ekko, reached the top five in over twenty countries, including no.  on the billboard hot . as promotion prior to the albums release, rihanna embarked on the  tour, a mini tour of seven shows in seven countries in seven days. on may , , fox aired a documentary about the tour, with a documentary dvd being released the following day as rihannas third live longform video release.in february , at the th grammy awards, rihanna won her sixth grammy award, in the category best short form music video for we found love . also that month, the united kingdoms official charts company announced that rihanna had sold ,, records in the past year in the country, ranking at no.  in the list of  brit awards artist nominees. rihannas fifth headlining concert tour, the diamonds world tour, began in march , in support of unapologetic. rihanna then appeared in the seth rogen and evan goldberg comedy film this is the end, which was released in june . that same month, american hip hop artist wale released a remixed version of his single bad featuring rihanna. in october , eminem released his rihannaassisted single, the monster, as the fourth release from his eighth studio album the marshall mathers lp  .

in , rihanna appeared on shakiras single, cant remember to forget you. following the release of unapologetic and its accompanying tour, rihanna aimed to take a hiatus from recording music, stating i wanted to have a year to just do whatever i want artistically, creatively. in may , rihanna left def jam recordings to sign fully with roc nation, the record label that had managed her career since october .a year after rihanna began working on her eighth studio album, the single fourfiveseconds was released, which featured rihanna paired up with kanye west and paul mccartney. two further singles followed its release bitch better have my money and american oxygen; neither made the final track listing for rihannas eighth studio album. during the creation of the album, rihanna ventured into other endeavors and appeared in the voice role of tip in the animated feature film home alongside jim parsons and jennifer lopez, the film was based on the true meaning of smekday by adam rex. rihanna also released a concept album soundtrack for the film.

in late , rihanna inked a  million contract with samsung that would see her promoting samsungs galaxy line of products whilst samsung would sponsor the release of her eighth studio album and its supporting tour. the anti world tour was announced in november  and began in march , with travis scott supporting in north america and big sean supporting at selected european dates. the weeknd had also initially planned to support at certain european sites, but he backed out citing unforeseen changes in upcoming projects. on january , , rihanna released her eighth studio album, anti, exclusively through streaming service tidal. the album peaked at no.  on the us billboard , becoming rihannas second no.  and eighth top  album on the chart. the album was supported by the release of four singles, including the lead single work, featuring drake, which topped the us billboard hot  chart. further platinumcertified singles needed me and love on the brain both peaked inside the top  of the us hot .in , rihanna was featured in several singles. the first collaboration single was kanye wests famous, where rihanna provided uncredited guest vocals. she was then officially featured on calvin harris this is what you came for, which was a success. rihanna was also featured on drakes too good and on mike will made its nothing is promised. in june , rihanna released sledgehammer, a single from the star trek beyond movie soundtrack. on august , , rihanna was honored with the michael jackson video vanguard award at the  mtv video music awards after performing various medleys of her hit songs.rihanna released several collaborations in . first she was the featured part in futures selfish, the lead single from the rappers sixth studio album, hndrxx. summer  saw the release of rihannas collaborations with record producer dj khaled, wild thoughts, which also featured bryson tiller and was a worldwide success, and kendrick lamars single, loyalty, which earned rihanna her ninth grammy award at the th annual grammy awards. in november , rihanna was part of n.e.r.ds comeback single lemon from the bands album no one ever really dies.

in october , shakka revealed that he was working with rihanna on her absolutely insane album. in december , rihanna confirmed that the album would be released in , and later announced that it is a reggae project. in august , fans noticed that rihanna and cosongwriters collin edwards, monique lawrence, and alexander ogunmokun registered a song titled private loving with the music publishing organization bmi. in september , it was announced she had signed with sony/atv music publishing. in december , rihanna alluded to her album being complete and indefinitely withholding the release date in an instagram post. she was next featured on canadian singer partynextdoors song believe it, which was released on march , . on september , , rihanna announced that she would be headlining the super bowl lvii halftime show, which marked her first live performance in over five years, and the end of her previously selfimposed boycott of the event, which she instigated in solidarity with colin kaepernick. the show was critically acclaimed. it was initially reported that the performance gained a total of . million viewers across tv and digital platforms,  however the figure was later revised by nielsen media research, who adjusted the number to . million viewers, making it the mostwatched halftime show in history, surpassing katy perrys performance at the super bowl xlix halftime show. in october, hdd confirmed that rihanna will do a stadium tour in .on october , , rihanna released the lead single from the black panther wakanda forever soundtrack, lift me up, her first solo musical release since anti. the song earned her nominations for the golden globe and academy award for best original song.

rihanna is a mezzosoprano, with a range spanning from b to c. while recording tracks for her third studio album, good girl gone bad , rihanna took vocal lessons from neyo. she said of the experience, ive never had vocal training, so when im in the studio, hell tell me how to breathe and stuff... hell call out these big fancy words ok, i want you to do staccato. and im like, ok, i dont know what that is. her vocal performance on loud  received positive reviews from music critics. james skinner from bbc praised rihannas vocals on the song love the way you lie  and wrote that her voice is powerful and that it is rihannas vocal  at once commanding, soulful and vulnerable  that anchors the song, and loud itself. andy gill from the independent feels that california king bed features her best vocal performance. in a review of unapologetic, billboard magazine wrote, diamonds finds rihanna doing one of her throatiest, most impassioned vocals to date, on this inspirational pop ballad. jon caramanica of the new york times stated, over the years, as her game face froze in place, her voice cured into a weapon of emotional chill and strategic indifference. its decidedly unfriendly, made to give orders. in , rolling stone ranked rihanna at number  on its list of the  greatest singers of all time.

growing up in barbados, she mainly listened to reggae, hip hop and soca music. when she first came to the us, she was exposed to different types of music with rock being one of them, and i fell in love with it. now i love rock music. during her debut, she recorded songs that were inspired by her caribbean roots and described her early sound as a fusion of reggae, hiphop and rb, with a little something different thrown in. her early dancehall roots can be found on her debut album, music of the sun, and its followup, a girl like me. her debut album demonstrates the influence of rihannas musical heritage of the caribbean. kelefa sanneh of the new york times complimented its combination of dancehall and reggae, who said, dancehall reggae sometimes seems like a furiously insular form of music, but ... rihanna is only the latest singer to discover how versatile the genres springloaded electronic rhythms can be. her debut single, pon de replay features a dancehallpop mixture that infuses a reggae style, while if its lovin that you want talks about a girl seducing a guy to be her boyfriend. aiming for artistic growth, a girl like me expresses personal experiences that typical yearold girls go through with ballads that were described as elegant and mature. after her second album, she slowly dismissed her dancehall and reggae roots.

rihannas musical career has been an experiment with new musical ideas and stated that she wants to make music that could be heard in parts of the world that id never been to. with its provocative subject matter and lyrics, she began incorporating a wide range of genres including, pop, rb, reggae, dubstep, hip hop and edm. during a review for good girl gone bad, slant magazine to write that rihanna finally figured out that shes a dance artist and the majority of the album is comprised of uptempo dancepop songs like push up on me and dont stop the music. it represents a departure from the caribbean sound of her previous albums and is described as a turning point in her career. while the first half of the record shares many s pop influences with songs like dont stop the music and shut up and drive, the second half retreats into standard rb.recorded after the assault by her thenboyfriend, chris brown, rated r had a much darker tone and was filled with various emotions she experienced throughout . in her fifth album loud, rihanna reflects on the fun and energetic vibe she had while recording the album. the album is a mixture of ballads, party anthems and empowering love songs. talk that talk was similar to rated r, as both contain hip hop, rb, dancehall and dubstep genres. loud and talk that talk saw her explore sexuality in her work  and return to her dancehall roots . she also branched out into house music with tracks like we found love, only girl  and complicated. her songs are also inspired through record sampling from other artists.

rihanna has named madonna as her idol and biggest influence. she said that she wanted to be the black madonna and praised her ability to reinvent herself throughout her career. she noted, i think that madonna was a great inspiration for me, especially on my earlier work. if i had to examine her evolution through time, i think she reinvented her clothing style and music with success every single time. and at the same time remained a real force in entertainment in the whole world.

another major influence on rihannas music and career has been mariah carey, whose song hero she performed when rihanna was still a teenager at her high school talent show. she revealed that careys song vision of love was the song that made her want to do music.in her youth, she would see bob marley on television because of his fame in the caribbean. she stated, hes one of my favourite artists of all time  he really paved the way for every other artist out of the caribbean. she built a shrine in her home dedicated to the reggae legend and has covered marleys is this love and bob marley  the wailers redemption song during her concert tours.

during her childhood, she would go around singing whitney houston songs and a whole new world into her hairbrush so much that her neighbors started calling her robyn redbreast. she also stated that one of the first songs she remembers falling in love with was houstons version of i will always love you and that it was really inspiring, and it made me develop a passion for music, so really, shes partly responsible for me being here in this industry.rihanna was also influenced by janet jackson, aaliyah, tupac, beyonc and destinys child. other musical influences and idols include celine dion, grace jones, lil kim, alicia keys, prince, fefe dobson, and brandy. rihanna takes influence from the different types of music she discovered when she came to america and revealed that rock music was one of the first genres she fell in love with. she commented, as i grow older, i want to know more about music. i want to discover more types of music. she cited brandys fourth studio album, afrodisiac , as her main inspiration for her third album, good girl gone bad . in her early career, her music contained strong influences of caribbean music, including reggae and dancehall. the music video of the song rude boy featured images inspired by her caribbean roots.

rihanna has worked with music video director anthony mandler on more than a dozen music videos, the first being unfaithful . weve done  videos together; theyre not all tough, ... yeah, i mean, im known for the disturbias and the russian roulettes and things like that, but only girl  is certainly an ethereal kind of empowering, beautyfilled video, mandler said. jocelyn vena of mtv wrote, rihanna, like madonna, also has a tendency to make truly thoughtprovoking music videos that fit the songs they represent. smattered in between glitzier, more glamorous clips, madge and ri want us to think about bigger issues. jon bream of the star tribune commented in the tradition of madonna and janet jackson, rihanna has become the video vixen of the s ... rihanna has perfected the pout, the longlegged strut, and trendsetting hairdos that keep women and men alike checking her out on youtube. george epaminondas of instyle considers rihannas music videos to be cinematic due to her blend of lush island rhythms and swinging pop and ... mischievous sensuality.

many of her music videos were shot as short films exploring issues such as love triangles, abuse and substance abuse romance, including we found love and man down. her music video for umbrella shows rihannas transition into adulthood and her newly adopted image. the dark, creepy scenes of disturbia have been compared to michael jacksons thriller. the video for russian roulette features rihanna in a padded room playing a game of russian roulette with her partner. a scene of rihanna being approached by a speeding car at night was compared to the altercation with chris brown.

in , rihanna released three controversial music videos about sadomasochism, rape and domestic violence. man down, which features rihanna shooting a man in a train station, was criticized by the parents television council. we found love, which shows rihanna and her love interest in a drugfilled unhealthy relationship, sparked criticism from the rape crisis centre for its message. charne graham of the houston press defended her, asking, why should rihannas music videos get everyone riled up when others equally sexual and controversial videos are in rotation ... she just likes to make music videos that give us something to talk about. rihanna was the first woman to pass  billion cumulative views on the music video website vevo. as of december , she has accumulated over  billion views on the site.

denis armstrong of canadian online explorer commented on her performance at the ottawa bluesfest, saying her show was a disneyesque choreographed fantasy of nonstop hipswiveling, sassy attitude and personal endearments and a string of funky, sugarfree hits. her performance of disturbia at the  mtv video music awards was ranked tenth best on the mtv video music awards, according to a billboard poll. her revealing leather costumes during her good girl gone bad tour were highly criticized by the panmalaysian islamic party, who recommended that her concert tour should be banned. whilst commenting on her third albums accompanying tour, the times compared rihannas stage wardrobe styling to that of janet jackson and called her a vision of ann summers couture in thighhigh boots and a few scraps of black pvc. in the october  issue of british vogue, rihanna said her performance outfits and appearances are all an act; thats not me. thats a part i play. you know, like its a piece of art, with all these toys and textures to play with.

known for her style and image, the media have constantly followed the evolution of rihannas music and fashion sense. in , new york magazine described rihannas early look as that of a cookiecutter teen queen, noting she has the ability to shift looks dramatically and with such ease. around the time of the release of her second studio album, a girl like me , many critics felt that rihannas style, sound and musical material were too similar to those of beyonc. in an interview with look magazine, rihanna spoke about comparisons to beyonc beyonc is a great artist and i feel honored to be mentioned in the same sentence, but were different performers with different styles. she revealed during oprahs next chapter that def jams popprincess blueprint made her feel claustrophobic during her early years with the label. according to rihanna, i felt like they were giving me a blueprint. ... they had a brand, they had an idea of what they wanted me to be without figuring out who i was. with the release of her third album, good girl gone bad , rihanna dismissed her innocent image for an edgier look with a new hairstyle, which was inspired by charlize therons bob cut in the science fiction thriller on flux . she followed the likes of recording artists janet jackson and christina aguilera who also shed their innocent image for an edgier look and sound.nico amarca of highsnobiety magazine wrote, over the course of her now year career, rihanna has undergone one of the most significant aesthetic metamorphoses the world has ever seen. her image and fashion has changed several times with different hairstyles since the release of her third album. she commented that as a child she used to watch her mother get dressed and that her love and admiration for fashion started with her mother. when putting together her own wardrobe she stated, its become more about taking a risk ... i always look for the most interesting silhouette or something thats a little off. jess cartnermorley of the guardian wrote that rihannas wardrobe is the most talkedabout, influential and dissected in pop right now and that whatever she wears is immediately reproduced on the high street, because it sells. country singer miranda lambert admires rihannas fashion and style stating, i dont necessarily get inspired by the whole nobra thing, but i love that you never know what shes going to wear. it always keeps you guessing, which makes her sassy and interesting.in an interview with alexa chung during vogue festival , balmain designer olivier rousteing praised rihanna by stylistically comparing her to some of the biggest fashion icons in music history, such as madonna, david bowie, michael jackson, and prince. commenting on the cultural expectation for pop stars to be role models, rihanna said being a role model became more of my job than i wanted it to be. but no, i just want to make music. thats it. in a may  interview with mtv, the vagina monologues writer and feminist eve ensler said, im a huge rihanna fan, i think she has a kind of agency over her sexuality and shes open about her sexuality, she has enormous grace and shes immensely talented.described as one of the sexiest women of her generation, she revealed that being a sex symbol is not a priority and that its definitely flattering, but also uncomfortable. her appearance has landed her on the cover of magazines such as maxim, fhm, rolling stone, and in december , rihanna became the first woman to be featured on the cover of gq magazines men of the year issue.rihanna made her first appearance at the met gala in . she has made eight appearances in the years since; notably in , for china through the looking glass, her guo peidesigned yellow dress garnered the most attention of the event, accruing a billion impressions on social media. the dress, which had taken two years to make before rihanna came across it, became the subject of a documentary by pietra brettkelly, entitled yellow is forbidden.

she cochaired the  heavenly bodies fashion and the catholic imagination themed event, wearing maison margiela.

rihanna is regarded by the media as a pop and fashion icon, particularly since her third studio album good girl gone bad . nick levine of digital spy described good girl gone bad as the closest thing to a thriller that / is likely to produce. according to rolling stone, her single umbrella and her eighth album anti are regarded as among the  greatest songs of all time and  greatest albums of all time, respectively. her single we found love was ranked by billboard as the th biggest us billboard hot  hit of all time and her single work has been credited by a billboard editor for bringing the dancehall genre to the forefront of mainstream american music. music critic jayson greene of pitchfork described rihanna as the most influential singer of the past decade, writingrihanna voice has become an industrywide idea, a creative property like the korg synth or linndrum ... we crave the thrill that you can only get when a dozen or so good ideas manifest themselves in a single voice. for the past  years, that voice has more or less been rihannas. now that shes gleefully shredding it apart, shell probably generate a whole new comet trail of rihannabes. inevitably, none of them will carry the charge, the glassy cool and subterranean heat, of the real thing.

time magazine included rihanna on its  most influential people in the world issue in  and , with stella mccartney writing shes one of the coolest, hottest, most talented, most liked, most listened to, most followed, most impressive artists at work today, but she does it in her own stride. she works hard, very hard. she gives to her fans, friends and foundation not just herself but her energy and spirit. rihanna was ranked one of the best dressed women in , by luxury fashion retailer netaporter. on june , , rihanna was presented with the fashion icon lifetime achievement award from council of fashion designers of america , a special prize reserved for an individual whose style has made a significant impact on popular culture on an international stage. in august , billboard ranked rihanna as the tenth biggest hot  artist of all time, as well as the fifth biggest female act of all time.billboard also ranked rihanna the top hot  artist of the s decade. in , time magazines pop stardom ranking metric ranked rihanna second in history, based on alltime chart performance and contemporary significance.rihanna has become a dominating figure on social media and internet streaming, ranking at no.  on forbes  list of social networking superstars. in , rihanna was also named the most influential pop star in the united kingdom by uk channel music. rihannas work has directly influenced numerous artists such as lorde, sam smith, little mix, rita ora, billie eilish, selena gomez, justin bieber, ellie goulding, kim petras, jennie from blackpink, marilyn manson, jessie j, sza, fifth harmony, camila cabello, demi lovato, alexandra stan, grimes, sleaterkinney, tegan and sara, cover drive, cher lloyd, bad gyal, and era istrefi.rihanna has an honorary title of ambassador for culture and youth in barbados. on february , , former barbados prime minister david thompson launched the national rihanna day in their country. although it is not a bank holiday, barbadians celebrate it every year in honor of rihanna. in february , rihanna was named harvard universitys humanitarian of the year by the harvard foundation. during rihannas third annual diamond ball, former u.s. president barack obama, praised rihannas work and stated shes become a powerful force in the fight to give people dignity. on september , , rihanna was appointed by the government of barbados to be an ambassador extraordinary and plenipotentiary, with special duties of promoting education, tourism and investment for the island. as of , rihanna is the worlds wealthiest female musician with an estimated net worth of . billion. she was also listed among forbes top  most powerful women of . in , she debuted on the sunday times rich list, claiming third place on the list of britains richest musicians.at the  naacp image awards, hosted by bet, rihanna accepted the presidents award from derrick johnson. johnson stated that rihanna has not only enjoyed a groundbreaking career as an artist and musician but has also distinguished herself as a stellar public servant. from her business achievements through fenty to her tremendous record as an activist and philanthropist, rihanna epitomizes the type of character, grace, and devotion to justice that we seek to highlight in our presidents award.

rihannas first fragrance, rebl fleur, was released in january . according to rolling stone, rebl fleur was a financial success and was expected to gross us million at retail by the end of .

rihannas second fragrance, rebelle, was released in february . the promotional campaign for rebelle, was shot by director, anthony mandler, who also shot the promotional campaign for rebl fleur.

in november , rihanna released her third fragrance, nude.

rihannas fourth womens fragrance, titled rogue was released on september , , followed by a male version entitled rogue men which was released in .on march , , it was announced that rihanna is a coowner, with various other music artists, in the music streaming service tidal. the service specializes in lossless audio and high definition music videos. jayz acquired the parent company of tidal, aspiro, in the first quarter of . including beyonc and jayz, sixteen artist stakeholders  coown tidal, with the majority owning a  equity stake. the challenge is to get everyone to respect music again, to recognize its value, stated jayz on the release of tidal.

in , it was revealed that rihanna would be releasing her music through her own label westbury road entertainment, which was established in .

westbury road is the name of her barbados residence. the music would be distributed through universal music group. westbury road entertainments artist roster includes melissa forde as the labels photographer, and kazeloon.

in november , rihanna and benoit demouy launched a beauty and stylist agency named frme. the business based in los angeles was set up to assist artists in booking commercials, editorial shoots, ad campaigns, and redcarpet appearances. rihanna stated, hair, makeup, and styling play an important role in creativity; i am very involved with that part of my process, so this agency was an organic thing for me to do. the roster includes rihannas makeup artist mylah morales, wardrobe stylist jason bolden, hairstylist patricia morales and marcia hamilton. in addition to frme, rihanna opened a photo agency called a dog ate my homework, which represents photographers erik asla and deborah anderson.

fenty was a fashion brand by rihanna under the luxury fashion group lvmh, which launched in may . she was the first woman to create an original brand for lvmh and also the first woman of color to lead an lvmh brand. the house launched in a popup store on may , , in paris, before launching worldwide online on may  and included clothing, accessories, and footwear. it was the first line that lvmh had launched since . the fashion brand was described as groundbreaking, and in a statement regarding the launch, rihanna said that she had been given a unique opportunity to develop a fashion house in the luxury sector, with no artistic limits. due to the impacts of the covid pandemic, in february , rihanna and lvmh decided to put on hold her fenty fashion house and continue building on the savagexfenty lingerie line.rihanna exclusively uses her surname for business endeavors not related to her music career so as not to conflate the two. in january , rihanna filed a lawsuit against her father, ronald fenty, over the use of the fenty name for commercial purposes. the lawsuit alleges rihannas cosmetics brand, fenty beauty, was damaged commercially by her fathers company, fenty entertainment, through misrepresentation of his company being affiliated with her. in september  rihanna dropped the lawsuit against her father.

in , rihanna launched her critically acclaimed cosmetics company fenty beauty under lvmhs kendo brands. rihanna owns  percent of fenty beauty, according to forbes. the partnership was worth  million and would see rihanna release various beauty products. the first installment of fenty beauty was released on september , , in stores and online, available in over  countries. it included an array of products including foundations, highlighters, bronzers, blush compacts, lip glosses and blotting sheets and was praised for its diverse range for all skin colors. time magazine named fenty beauty as one of the  best inventions of , citing the breadth of its range. in what has been dubbed the fenty effect, the brand revolutionized the way other cosmetic brands approached diversity in marketing and product formulation suddenly beauty houses  niche, establishment and those in between  began extending their shade ranges to accommodate a wider variety of skin tones. forty shades became the new standard.

in , rihanna launched a lingerie brand named savage x fenty. the line was born from rihannas vision creating an inclusive brand. products come in a variety of shades to match all skin tones and a range of sizes. she showcased the brand at the new york fashion week in september . the brand has been positively reviewed by the public for including plus size models in their promotion, though some fans argued there were not enough plus sizes.in september , rihanna promoted the brand in a show again during the new york fashion week held at the barclays center with modeling appearances from models alex wek, bella hadid, cara delevingne, actress laverne cox, and musicians normani and  savage. the show featured performances by dj khaled, halsey, asap ferg, big sean, migos, fat joe, fabolous, and tierra whack and premiered on amazon prime video on september , , as the savage x fenty show. the show was renewed for a third time in , with appearances from musicians such as travis scott, rosala, bad bunny, ella mai, lizzo, big sean, miguel, roddy ricch and rico nasty. this version also premiered on amazon prime video on october , .

in july , rihanna launched a skin care brand called fenty skin.

rihanna has ventured into other businesses and industries. in october , rihanna struck an endorsement deal with secret body spray. in , rihanna featured in the optus commercial, in conjunction with optus supporting rihannas last girl on earth. the same year rihanna also featured in the kodak commercial along with rapper pitbull. in october , she released a photo book featuring photos from the last girl on earth tour and served as an accompaniment to her fourth studio album rated r . in , rihanna was the face of nivea and vita coco.her first television program, styled to rock, premiered in the uk in august  on sky living. in the week series, rihanna, nicola roberts, lysa cooper and henry holland assist upandcoming british designers with their clothing lines. the us version of styled to rock premiered on october , , on bravo. in , rihanna collaborated with mac cosmetics and released her own summer, fall and holiday lines of makeup called riri hearts mac. in july , lager production company budweiser announced that rihanna had become a part of their global made for music campaign, also costarring jayz.early in her career, rihanna made clear her interest in fashion and desire to work in the clothing design industry. regarding this, she said, fashion has always been my defense mechanism. in november , rihanna announced her first fashion venture with armani. in february , rihanna presented her first womens fashion collection at london fashion week for british brand river island, collaborating with her personal stylist adam selman. they published three more collections for the brand. rihanna then collaborated with numerous fashion houses including dior, stance and manolo blahnik.

in march , rihanna was chosen as the new face of dior; making her the first black woman to be the face of the brand.in , rihanna became the creative director of the fashion sportswear puma, overseeing the brands womens line which will include collaborations in apparel and footwear. the following year, rihanna released her first trainer with puma and it sold out online within three hours of its presale launch. over the next two years, rihanna released various other footwear in different colorways and styles, which were all met positively by both critics and buyers.  saw rihanna debut her first clothing line in collaboration with puma at new york fashion week; the collection was met with rave reviews from fashion critics.

rihanna made her acting debut in a cameo role in the straighttodvd film bring it on all or nothing, released in august . rihanna starred as petty officer  cora raikes in her first theatrical feature film battleship, which was released on may , . loosely based on the game of the same name, both the film and rihannas performance received mixedtonegative reviews; the new york times said she was just fine in the rather generic role.

in , rihanna appeared in the voice role of tip in the animated feature film home alongside jim parsons and jennifer lopez; the film was based on the true meaning of smekday by adam rex.

rihanna played the recurring role of marion crane in the fifth and final season of bates motel. the show received universal acclaim from critics. rihanna also had a major role in the luc besson film valerian and the city of a thousand planets, an adaptation of the comic book series valrian and laureline. also starring dane dehaan and cara delevingne, the film was released by stx entertainment on july , , in the us rihanna was one of the allfemale cast in the heist film oceans , directed by gary ross and released by warner bros. on june , . the movie grossed  million worldwide and became a major box office success.in august , it had been reported that rihanna had been filming a secret project in cuba titled guava island throughout that summer alongside donald glover. glovers atlanta collaborator hiro murai was directing, with letitia wright and nonso anozie also involved. the trailer for the fulllength movie premiered on november  at the pharos festival in new zealand. the exact details project were not announced until april  when advertisements for guava island appeared on spotify indicating something happening on saturday night  april . it was later revealed amazon studios would distribute the film and regency enterprises had financed the film, which was released on april .

in , she created her believe foundation to help terminally ill children.

in , rihanna was named as one of the cartier love charity bracelet ambassadors, with each celebrity representing a different global charity. to help raise awareness and combat hiv/aids, rihanna and other public figures designed clothing for the february  hm fashion against aids line. in , rihanna performed a series of charity concerts entitled a girls night out to benefit the believe foundation. the concerts were made free for the public. money from sponsors and advertisers were to be donated to provide medical supplies, school supplies and toys to children in need. in september , rihanna contributed to the song just stand up with fifteen other female artists, who shared the stage to perform the song live on september , , during the stand up to cancer television special. the proceeds from the single were given to the fundraiser. the television special helped raise  million for cancer research.

rihanna founded the clara lionel foundation  in , in honor of her grandparents, clara and lionel braithwaite. programs include the clara braithwaite center for oncology and nuclear medicine at the queen elizabeth hospital in barbados, and education programs. the clf hosts an annual diamond ball charity fundraiser event. the inaugural event in  raised over  million and the second raised over  million. on february , , rihanna performed a benefit show at the house of blues to raise money for the childrens orthopaedic center and the mark taperjohnny mercer artists program at childrens hospital. in november , rihanna gave , to food bank donation for hurricane sandy. on january , , rihanna was part of the mac viva glam campaign, which benefits women, men and children living with hiv/aids. in march , rihanna donated ,, to covid relief and followed that up with additional donations of personal protective equipment to the state of new york and an offer of , worth of ventilators to her home country barbados. in april , rihanna further donated an additional ,,, matching twitter ceo jack dorsey for a total of ,,, to provide support and resources to individuals and children suffering from domestic violence amid the lockdown.the clara lionel foundation gave big amounts of money to climate justice and climate resilience. only in  it allocated  million euro to climate justice.

during her performance at the ncaa march madness music festival, rihanna expressed her disagreement with indianas religious freedom restoration act that allows companies and individuals to use their religious beliefs as protection, in case of being accused of discrimination against lgbt people. rihanna along with numerous other highprofile celebrities featured in an online video titled  ways you could be killed if you are black in america. the video was released in partnership with the we are here movement and called for action against police brutality.in january , rihanna participated in the  womens march, which took place in new york among protests the day after us president donald trumps inauguration. she has also criticized president trumps immigration policiesincluding executive order , which sought to ban citizens of iran, iraq, libya, somalia, sudan, syria, and yemen from entering the united statesand his response to the  shootings in el paso and dayton. in october , she stated that she declined to perform at the  super bowl halftime show in support of colin kaepernick following the controversy surrounding his role in the national anthem protests. in february , rihanna extended her support to indian farmers protest against the farm bills through twitter.rihanna with many others called to a transformation of the global financial system so it will be better adjusted to stop climate change and poverty. one of the ideas is to give help to countries heavily suffering from climate change.

rihanna owns a  million penthouse in lower manhattan. she also purchased a house in west london for  million in june , to be closer to her work with her fenty fashion label. in december , rihanna put her hollywood hills mansion up for sale after a breakin six months before. the mansion was reported to have sold for .m. forbes began reporting on rihannas earnings in .rihanna began dating american singer chris brown in . after their relationship ended in february , she entered an onagain, offagain relationship with canadian rapper drake, which lasted from  to . during an interview with rolling stone in january , rihanna confirmed that she had rekindled her relationship with brown, although he remained under probation for their  domestic violence case. their reunion followed persistent media speculation that occurred throughout . in may , brown stated during an interview that he and rihanna had broken up again. in , rihanna began dating saudi businessman hassan jameel. they split in january .on may , , american rapper asap rocky confirmed during an interview with gq that he and rihanna were in a relationship. on january , , it was revealed that the couple was expecting their first child. on may , , it was confirmed that rihanna had given birth to a son. on may , , rocky and rihanna revealed their sons name as rza athelaston mayers, named after wutang clan leader and founder rza. on february , , during the super bowl lvii halftime show performance, rihanna revealed she is pregnant with her second child, becoming the first person to headline a super bowl halftime show while pregnant. the pregnancy was confirmed in a british vogue cover story featuring her family, which was released days after the super bowl appearance.

on february , , rihannas scheduled performance at the st annual grammy awards was canceled. reports surfaced that her boyfriend at the time, chris brown, had physically assaulted her. he turned himself in to the police and was booked on suspicion of making criminal threats. on march , , brown was charged with assault and making criminal threats. due to a leaked photograph from the police department obtained by tmz.comwhich revealed that rihanna had sustained extensive visible injuriesan organization known as stoparazzi proposed rihannas law, which, if enacted, would deter employees of law enforcement agencies from releasing photos or information that exploits crime victims. gil kaufman of vh reported the nonstop coverage of the rihanna/brown case has brought up a number of issues regarding the privacy of alleged victims of domestic violence, including the decision by almost all major news outlets to divulge the identity of the victimwhich is not typically done in domesticviolence cases and discussed the controversial distribution of the leaked photograph. rihanna was subpoenaed to testify during a preliminary hearing in los angeles on june , . on june , , brown pleaded guilty to felony assault. brown received five years of probation and was ordered to stay  yards  away from rihanna unless at public events, which then would be reduced to  yards .on september , , brown spoke about the domestic violence case in a prerecorded larry king live interview, his first public interview about the matter. he was accompanied to the interview by his mother, joyce hawkins, and attorney mark geragos, as he discussed growing up in a household with his mother being repeatedly assaulted by his stepfather. brown said of hearing details of his assault of rihanna, im in shock, because, first of all, thats not who i am as a person, and thats not who i promise i want to be.

as of september , rihanna has sold over  million records worldwide, making her one of the bestselling music artists of all time. throughout her career, she has received numerous awards and honors, including  grammy awards,  billboard music awards,  american music awards,  peoples choice awards, among others. rihanna received the icon award at the  american music awards and the michael jackson video vanguard award at the  mtv video music awards. she holds six guinness world records. in the united states, rihanna has sold over  million albums, while nielsen soundscan ranked her as the bestselling digital artist in the country, breaking a guinness world record for digital single sales of over  million as of .on july , , the recording industry association of america  announced that rihanna had surpassed more than  million gold and platinum song certifications. in doing so, rihanna has the most digital single awards and is the first and only artist to surpass riaas  million cumulative singles award threshold. in the united kingdom, she has sold over  million albums, making her the third bestselling female artist this century. according to billboard, her total album sales stand at  million copies sold worldwide.rihanna has accumulated  no.  singles on the us billboard hot  chart for the third most no.  songs in the charts history. she has been named the top mainstream top  chart artist of the past twenty years by billboard; she ranks first with most entries , most top tens  and most no.  songs . as of march , rihanna has sold over  million singles and  million albums in the united kingdom. she is the tenth bestselling and the second bestselling female singles artist in the country, only behind madonna and is second only to the beatles for the most millionselling singles in the uk of all time. her collaboration with eminem, love the way you lie, along with umbrella, disturbia, only girl , we found love and diamonds, are among the bestselling singles of all time. rihanna has seven no.  singles on the hot rb/hiphop songs chart, and airplay chart, as well as sixteen no.  singles on the rhythmic chart. she has also earned over  topten songs in the uk and australia.

music of the sun 

a girl like me 

good girl gone bad 

rated r 

loud 

talk that talk 

unapologetic 

anti 

bring it on all or nothing 

battleship 

this is the end 

home 

valerian and the city of a thousand planets 

oceans  

guava island 

as a headliner

rihanna live in concert 

good girl gone bad tour 

last girl on earth tour 

loud tour 

diamonds world tour 

anti world tour as a coheadliner

the monster tour  promotional tours

a girls night out 

 tour 

keanu charles reeves  is a canadian actor. born in beirut and raised in toronto, he made his acting debut in the canadian television series hangin in , before making his feature film debut in youngblood . reeves had his breakthrough role in the science fiction comedy bill  teds excellent adventure , and he reprised his role in its sequels. he gained praise for playing a hustler in the independent drama my own private idaho  and established himself as an action hero with leading roles in point break  and speed .

following several box office failures, reevess performance in the horror film the devils advocate  was well received. greater stardom came for playing neo in the science fiction series the matrix, beginning in . he played john constantine in constantine  and starred in the romantic drama the lake house , the science fiction thriller the day the earth stood still , and the crime thriller street kings . following another commercially down period, reeves made a successful comeback by playing the titular assassin in the john wick film series, beginning in . time named him one of the  most influential people in the world in .in addition to acting, reeves has directed the film man of tai chi . he plays bass guitar for the band dogstar and pursued other endeavours such as writing and philanthropy.

reeves was born in beirut, lebanon, on september , , the son of patricia , a costume designer and performer, and samuel nowlin reeves jr. his mother is english, originating from essex. his american father is from hawaii, and is of native hawaiian, chinese, english, irish, and portuguese descent. reevess paternal grandmother is chinese hawaiian. his mother was working in beirut when she met his father, who abandoned his wife and family when reeves was three years old. reeves last met his father on the hawaiian island of kauai when he was .after his parents divorced in , his mother moved the family to sydney, and then to new york city, where she married paul aaron, a broadway and hollywood director, in . the couple moved to toronto and divorced in . when reeves was nine, he took part in a theatre production of damn yankees. aaron remained close to reeves, offering him advice and recommending him a job at the hedgerow theatre in pennsylvania. reevess mother married robert miller, a rock music promoter, in ; the couple divorced in . reeves and his sisters grew up primarily in the yorkville neighbourhood of toronto, with a nanny caring for them frequently. because of his grandmothers ethnicity, he grew up with chinese art, furniture, and cuisine. reeves watched british comedy shows such as the two ronnies, and his mother imparted english manners that he has maintained into adulthood.describing himself as a private kid, reeves attended four different high schools, including the etobicoke school of the arts, from which he was expelled. reeves said he was expelled because he was just a little too rambunctious and shot my mouth off once too often... i was not generally the most welloiled machine in the school. reeves has dyslexia and has said, because i had trouble reading, i wasnt a good student. at de la salle college, he was a successful ice hockey goalkeeper. reeves had aspirations to play for the canadian olympic team but decided to become an actor when he was . after leaving de la salle college, he attended avondale secondary alternative school, which allowed him to get an education while working as an actor. reeves dropped out of high school when he was . he obtained a green card through his american stepfather and moved to los angeles three years later. reeves holds only canadian citizenship.

in , reeves was a correspondent for the canadian broadcasting corporation  youth television program going great. that same year, he made his acting debut in an episode of the television series, called hangin in. in , he played mercutio in a stage production of romeo and juliet at the leah posluns theatre in north york, ontario. he made further appearances on stage, including brad frasers cult hit wolfboy in toronto. he also appeared in a cocacola commercial in , and in the national film board of canada  comingofage, short film one step away.reeves later said that, when he was looking for work in the mids, his agents advised him to go by a different name because his first name was too ethnic. he briefly initialized his first and middle name and attended auditions as k. c. or casey reeves before reverting to keanu.reeves made a foray into television films in , including nbcs babes in toyland, act of vengeance and brotherhood of justice. he made his first motion picture appearances in peter markles youngblood , in which he played a goalkeeper, and in the lowbudget romantic drama, flying. he was cast as matt in rivers edge, a crime drama about a group of high school friends dealing with a murder case, loosely based on the  murder of marcy renee conrad. the film premiered in  at the toronto international film festival to a largely positive response. janet maslin of the new york times describes the performances of the young cast as natural and credible, with reeves being described as affecting and sympathetic.towards the end of the s, reeves starred in several dramas aimed at teen audiences, including as the lead in the night before , a comedy starring opposite lori loughlin, the prince of pennsylvania  and permanent record . although the latter received mixed reviews, variety magazine praised reevess performance, which opens up nicely as the drama progresses. his other acting efforts included a supporting role in dangerous liaisons , which earned seven nominations at the st academy awards, winning three best adapted screenplay, best costume design, and best production design. this was followed by bill  teds excellent adventure , in which he portrays a slacker who travels through time with a friend , to assemble historical figures for a school presentation. the film was generally well received by critics and grossed . million at the worldwide box office. film review aggregator rotten tomatoes gave the film a  approval rating with the critical consensus keanu reeves and alex winter are just charming, goofy, and silly enough to make this fluffy timetravel adventure work.in , reeves starred in the comedydrama parenthood directed by ron howard. nick hilditch of the bbc gave the film three out of five stars, calling it a feelgood movie with an extensive and entertaining ensemble cast. in , reeves gave two acting performances; he portrayed an incompetent hitman in the black comedy i love you to death, and played martin, a radio station employee in the comedy tune in tomorrow. he also appeared in paula abduls music video for rush rush which featured a rebel without a cause motif, with him in the james dean role.

in , reeves starred in bill  teds bogus journey, a sequel to bill  teds excellent adventure, with his costar alex winter. michael wilmington of the los angeles times wrote that the sequel was more imaginative, more opulent, wilder and freer, more excitingly visualized, praising the actors for their fuller performances. film critic roger ebert thought it was a riot of visual invention and weird humour that works on its chosen submoronic level ... its the kind of movie where you start out snickering in spite of yourself, and end up actually admiring the originality that went into creating this hallucinatory slapstick. the rest of  marked a significant transition for reevess career as he undertook adult roles. costarring with river phoenix as a street hustler in the adventure my own private idaho, the characters embark on a journey of personal discovery. the story was written by gus van sant, and is loosely based on shakespeares henry iv, part , henry iv, part , and henry v. the film premiered at the th venice international film festival, followed by a theatrical release in the united states on september , . the film earned . million at the box office. my own private idaho was positively received, with owen gleiberman of entertainment weekly describing the film as a postmodern road movie with a mood of freefloating, trancelike despair ... a rich, audacious experience. the new york times complimented reeves and phoenix for their insightful performances.reeves starred alongside patrick swayze, lori petty and gary busey in the action thriller point break , directed by kathryn bigelow. he plays an undercover fbi agent tasked with investigating the identities of a group of bank robbers. to prepare for the film, reeves and his costars took surfing lessons with professional surfer dennis jarvis in hawaii; reeves had never surfed before. upon its release, point break was generally wellreceived, and a commercial success, earning . million at the box office. reevess performance was praised by the new york times for considerable discipline and range, adding, he moves easily between the buttoneddown demeanour that suits a police procedural story and the loosejointed manner of his comic roles. writing for the washington post, hal hinson called reeves the perfect choice and praised the surfing scenes, but opined that the filmmakers have their characters make the most ludicrously illogical choices imaginable. at the  mtv movie awards, reeves won the most desirable male award.in , reeves developed an interest in a music career; he formed an alternative rock band called dogstar, consisting of members robert mailhouse, gregg miller and bret domrose. reeves played the bass guitar. a year later, he played jonathan harker in francis ford coppolas gothic horror bram stokers dracula, based on stokers  novel dracula. starring alongside gary oldman, winona ryder and anthony hopkins, the film was critically and commercially successful. it grossed . million worldwide. for his role, reeves was required to speak with an english accent, which drew some ridicule; overly posh and entirely ridiculous, reevess performance is as painful as it is hilarious, wrote limara salt of virgin media. in a retrospective interview in , director coppola said, reeves tried so hard ... he wanted to do it perfectly and in trying to do it perfectly it came off as stilted. bram stokers dracula was nominated for four academy awards, winning three in best costume design, best sound editing and best makeup. the film also received four nominations at the british academy film awards.in , he had a role in much ado about nothing, based on shakespeares play of the same name. the film received positive reviews, although reeves was nominated for a golden raspberry award for worst supporting actor. the new republic magazine thought his casting was unfortunate because of his amateur performance. in that same year, he starred in two more drama films, even cowgirls get the blues and little buddha, both of which garnered a mixedtonegative reception. the independent critic gave little buddha a mixed review but opined that reevess part as a prince was credible. the film also left an impression on reeves; he later said, when i played this innocent prince who starts to suspect something when he has the first revelations about old age, sickness and death, it hit me. ... that lesson has never left me.he starred in the action thriller speed  alongside sandra bullock and dennis hopper. he plays police officer jack traven, who must prevent a bus from exploding by keeping its speed above  mph. speed was the directorial debut of dutch director jan de bont. several actors were considered for the lead role, but reeves was chosen because bont was impressed with his point break performance. to look the part, reeves shaved all his hair off and spent two months in the gym to gain muscle mass. during production, reevess friend river phoenix  died, resulting in adjustments to the filming schedule to allow him to mourn. speed was released on june  to a critically acclaimed response. gene siskel of the chicago tribune lauded reeves, calling him absolutely charismatic ... giving a performance juiced with joy as he jumps through elevator shafts ... and atop a subway train. david ansen, writing for newsweek, summarized speed as, relentless without being overbearing, this is one likely blockbuster that doesnt feel too big for its britches. its a friendly juggernaut. the film grossed  million from a  million budget and won two academy awards in   best sound editing and best sound.

reevess next leading role came in the  cyberpunk action thriller johnny mnemonic, directed by artist robert longo and based on the  story of the same name by william gibson. set in , it is about a man who has a cybernetic brain implant and must deliver a data package before he dies or is killed by the yakuza. the film received mainly negative reviews and critics felt reeves was woefully miscast. roger ebert opined that the film is one of the great goofy gestures of recent cinema, a movie that doesnt deserve one nanosecond of serious analysis but has a kind of idiotic grandeur that makes you almost forgive it. as part of the film studios marketing efforts, a cdrom video game was also released.he next appeared in the romantic drama a walk in the clouds , which also garnered mixedtonegative reviews. reeves plays a young soldier returning home from world war ii, trying to settle down with a woman he married impulsively just before he enlisted. film critic mick lasalle opined that a walk in the clouds is for the most part a beautiful, wellacted and emotionally rich picture, whereas hal hinson from the washington post said, the film has the syrupy, kodak magicmoment look of a bo derek movie, and pretty much the same level of substance.besides film work, reeves retreated briefly to the theatre playing prince hamlet in a  manitoba theatre centre production of hamlet in winnipeg, manitoba. the sunday times critic roger lewis believed his performance, writing he quite embodied the innocence, the splendid fury, the animal grace of the leaps and bounds, the emotional violence, that form the prince of denmark ... he is one of the top three hamlets i have seen, for a simple reason he is hamlet.reeves was soon drawn to science fiction roles, appearing in chain reaction  with costars morgan freeman, rachel weisz, fred ward, kevin dunn and brian cox. he plays a researcher of a green energy project, who has to go on the run when he is framed for murder. chain reaction was not a critical success and gained mostly a negative reaction; review aggregator rotten tomatoes gave it a rating of  and described it as a manontherun thriller that mostly sticks to generic formula. reevess film choices after chain reaction were also critical disappointments. he starred in the independent crime comedy feeling minnesota , with vincent donofrio and cameron diaz, which was described as shoddily assembled, and fundamentally miscast by rotten tomatoes. in that year, he turned down an offer to star in speed  cruise control, despite being offered a salary of  million. according to reeves, this decision caused th century fox to sever ties with him for a decade.instead, reeves toured with his band dogstar, and appeared in the drama the last time i committed suicide , based on a  letter written by neal cassady to jack kerouac. reevess performance gained mixed reviews; paul tatara of cnn called him void of talent ... here he is again, reciting his lines as if theyre nonrelated words strung together as a memory exercise, whereas empire magazine thought reeves gives the nearest thing to a performance in his career as the enthusiastic feckless drunk. he starred in the  supernatural horror the devils advocate alongside al pacino and charlize theron; reeves agreed to a pay cut of several million dollars so that the film studio could afford to hire pacino. based on andrew neidermans novel of the same name, the feature is about a successful young lawyer invited to new york city to work for a major firm, who discovers the owner of the firm is a devil. the devils advocate attracted positive reviews from critics. film critic james berardinelli called the film highly enjoyable and wrote, there are times when reeves lacks the subtlety that would have made this a more multilayered portrayal, but its nevertheless a solid job.

in , reeves starred in the critically acclaimed science fiction film the matrix, the first installment in what would become the matrix franchise. reeves portrays computer programmer thomas anderson, a hacker using the alias neo, who discovers humanity is trapped inside a simulated reality created by intelligent machines. written and directed by the wachowskis, reeves had to prepare by reading kevin kellys out of control the new biology of machines, social systems, and the economic world, and dylan evanss ideas on evolutionary psychology. the principal cast underwent months of intense training with martial arts choreographer yuen wooping to prepare for the fight scenes. the matrix proved to be a box office success; several critics considered it to be one of the best science fiction films of all time. kenneth turan of the los angeles times felt it was a wildly cinematic futuristic thriller that is determined to overpower the imagination, despite perceiving weaknesses in the films dialogue. janet maslin of the new york times credited reeves for being a strikingly chic prada model of an action hero, and thought the martial arts stunts were the films strongest feature. the matrix received academy awards for best film editing, best sound editing, best visual effects, and best sound.after the success of the matrix, reeves avoided another blockbuster in favour of a lighthearted sports comedy, the replacements . he agreed to a pay cut to enable gene hackman to costar in the film. against his wishes, reeves starred in the thriller the watcher , playing a serial killer who stalks a retired fbi agent. he said that a friend forged his signature on a contract, which he could not prove; he appeared in the film to avoid legal action. upon its release, the film was critically panned. that year, he had a supporting role in another thriller, sam raimis the gift, a story about a woman  with extrasensory perception asked to help find a young woman who disappeared. the film grossed  million worldwide. film critic paul clinton of cnn thought the film was fairly compelling, saying of reevess acting raimi managed to get a performance out of reeves that only occasionally sounds like hes reading his lines from the back of a cereal box.in , reeves continued to explore and accept roles in a diverse range of genres. the first was a romantic drama, sweet november, a remake of the  film of the same name. this was his second collaboration with charlize theron; the film was met with a generally negative reception. desson thompson of the washington post criticized it for its syrupy cliches, greetingcard wisdom and overthetop tragicomedy, but commended reeves for his likability factor in every performance he gives. hardball  marked reevess attempt in another sports comedy. directed by brian robbins, it is based on the book hardball a season in the projects by daniel coyle. reeves plays conor oneill, a troubled young man who agrees to coach a little league team from the cabrini green housing project in chicago as a condition of obtaining a loan. film critic roger ebert noted the films desire to tackle difficult subjects and baseball coaching, but felt it lacked depth, and reevess performance was glum and distant.by , his professional music career had come to an end when dogstar disbanded. the band had released two albums during their decade together; our little visionary in  and happy ending in . sometime afterwards, reeves performed in the band becky for a year, founded by dogstar bandmate rob mailhouse, but quit in , citing a lack of interest in a serious music career. after being absent from the screen in , reeves returned to the matrix sequels in  with the matrix reloaded and the matrix revolutions, released in may and november, respectively. principal photography for both films was completed backtoback, primarily at fox studios in australia. the matrix reloaded garnered mostly favourable reviews; john powers of la weekly praised the dazzling pyrotechnics but was critical of certain machinelike action scenes. of reevess acting, powers thought it was somewhat wooden but felt he has the ability to exude a charmed aura. andrew walker, writing for the evening standard, praised the cinematography  but he was less taken by the films dimestore philosophy. the film grossed  million worldwide.the matrix revolutions, the third instalment, was met with mixed reception. according to review aggregator rotten tomatoes, the consensus was that characters and ideas take a back seat to the special effects. paul clinton, writing for cnn, praised the special effects but felt reevess character was unfocused. in contrast, the san francisco chronicles carla meyer was highly critical of the special effects, writing, the wachowskis computergenerated imagery goes from dazzling to deadening in action scenes that favor heavy, clanking weaponry over the martialarts moves that thrilled viewers of the matrix and the matrix reloaded. nevertheless, the film grossed a healthy  million worldwide, although less than the two previous films. somethings gotta give, a romantic comedy, was reevess last release of . he costarred with jack nicholson and diane keaton, and played dr. julian mercer in the film. somethings gotta give received generally favourable reviews.

in , reeves played the title role in constantine, an occult detective film, about a man who has the ability to perceive and communicate with halfangels and halfdemons. the film was a respectable box office hit, grossing  million worldwide from a  million budget but attracted mixedtopositive reviews. the sydney morning heralds critic wrote that constantine isnt bad, but it doesnt deserve any imposing adjectives. its occasionally cheesy, sometimes enjoyable, intermittently scary, and constantly spiked with celestial blatherskite. he next appeared in thumbsucker, which premiered at the sundance film festival in . a comedy adapted from the  walter kirn novel of the same name, the story follows a boy with a thumbsucking problem. reeves and the cast garnered positive critical reviews, with the washington post describing it as a gently stirring symphony about emotional transition filled with lovely musical passages and softly nuanced performances.reeves appeared in the richard linklaterdirected animated science fiction thriller a scanner darkly, which premiered at the  cannes film festival. reeves played bob arctor/fred, an undercover agent in a futuristic dystopia under hightech police surveillance. based on the novel of the same name by philip k. dick, the film was a box office failure. however, the film attracted generally favourable reviews; paul arendt of the bbc thought the film was beautiful to watch, but reeves was outshone by his costar robert downey jr. his next role was alex wyler in the lake house , a romantic drama adaptation of the south korean film il mare , which reunited him with sandra bullock. despite its box office success, mark kermode of the guardian was highly critical, writing this syrupdrenched supernatural whimsy achieves stupidity at a genuinely international level ... the last time bullock and reeves were together on screen the result was speed. this should have been entitled stop. towards the end of , he conarrated the great warming with alanis morissette, a documentary about climate change mitigation.next in , reeves collaborated with director david ayer on the crime thriller street kings. he played an undercover policeman who must clear his name after the death of another officer. released on april , the film grossed a moderate  million worldwide. the films plot and reeves performance, however, were met with mostly unenthusiastic reviews. paul byrnes of the sydney morning herald stated, its full of twists and turns, a dead body in every reel, but its not difficult to work out whos betraying whom, and thats just not good enough. the guardian opined that reeves is fundamentally blank and uninteresting. reeves starred in another science fiction film, the day the earth stood still, a loose adaptation of the  film of the same name. he portrayed klaatu, an alien sent from outer space to try to change human behaviour or eradicate humans because of their environmental impact. at the  razzie awards, the film was nominated for worst prequel, remake, ripoff or sequel. many critics were unimpressed with the heavy use of special effects; the telegraph credited reeves ability to engage the audience, but thought the cinematography was abysmal and the subalgore environment lecture leaves you lightheaded with tedium.

rebecca millers the private lives of pippa lee was reeves sole release of , which premiered at the th berlin international film festival. the romantic comedy and its ensemble received an amicable review from the telegraphs david gritten; millers film is a triumph. uniformly well acted, it boasts a psychologically knowing script, clearly written by a smart, assertive human. in , he starred in another romantic comedy, henrys crime, about a man who is released from prison for a crime he did not commit, but then targets the same bank with his former cellmate. the film was not a box office hit. reeves only work in  was an adult picture book titled ode to happiness, which he wrote, complemented by alexandra grants illustrations. reeves coproduced and appeared in a  documentary, side by side. he interviewed filmmakers including james cameron, martin scorsese, and christopher nolan; the feature investigated digital and photochemical film creation. next, reeves starred in generation um... , an independent drama which was critically panned.in , reeves starred in his own directorial debut, the martial arts film man of tai chi. the film has multilingual dialogue and follows a young man drawn to an underground fight club, partially inspired by the life of reeves friend tiger chen. principal photography took place in china and in hong kong. reeves was also assisted by yuen wooping, the fight choreographer of the matrix films. man of tai chi premiered at the beijing film festival and the cannes film festival, and received praise from director john woo. a wider, warm response followed suit; bilge ebiri of vulture thought the fight sequences were beautifully assembled, and reeves showed restraint with the film editing to present the fighters motion sequences. the los angeles times wrote, the brutally efficient shooting style reeves employs to film master choreographer yuen woopings breathtaking fights ... is refreshingly grounded and oldschool kinetic, while dave mcginn of the globe and mail called the film ambitious but generic. at the box office, man of tai chi was a commercial disappointment, grossing only . million worldwide from a budget of  million. also in , reeves played kai in the d fantasy  ronin, a japanese fable about a group of rogue samurai. the film premiered in japan but failed to gain traction with audiences; reviews were not positive, causing universal pictures to reduce advertising for the film elsewhere.  ronin was a box office flop and was mostly poorly received.

after this series of commercial failures, reeves career rebounded in . he played the title role in the action thriller john wick, directed by chad stahelski. in the first instalment of the john wick franchise, reeves plays a retired hitman seeking vengeance. he worked closely with the screenwriter to develop the story; we all agreed on the potential of the project. i love the role, but you want the whole story, the whole ensemble to come to life, reeves said. filmed on location in the new york city area, the film was eventually released on october  in the united states. the hollywood reporter was impressed by the directors confident, muscular action debut, and reeves effortless performance, which marked his return to the action genre. jeannette catsoulis of the new york times praised reeves fight scenes and wrote he is always more comfortable in roles that demand cool over hot, attitude over emotion. john wick proved to be a box office success, grossing  million worldwide. next, reeves starred in a smallerscale horror feature, knock knock , a remake of the  film death game. described as overthetop destruction by the toronto star, reeves plays a father, home alone, when two young women show up and start a game of cat and mouse. his other releases in  were the documentaries deep web, about crime on the dark web, and mifune the last samurai, about the life of a japanese actor  famous for playing samurai characters. he narrated both films.reeves appeared in five film releases in . the first was exposed, a crime thriller about a detective who investigates his partners death and discovers police corruption along the way. the film received negative reviews for its confused plot, and reeves was criticized for displaying limited facial expressions. his next release, the comedy keanu, was better received. in it he voiced the eponymous kitten. reeves then had a minor role in the neon demon, a psychological horror directed by nicolas winding refn. he played hank, a lustful motel owner who appears in jesses  nightmare. in his fourth release, he played a charismatic leader of a settlement in the bad batch. his final release of the year was the whole truth, featuring gabriel basso, gugu mbatharaw, rene zellweger, and jim belushi. he played richard, a defence attorney. noel murray of the a.v. club described it as moderately clever, reasonably entertaining courtroom drama, with a skilled cast but overall a mundane film. reeves also appeared in swedish dicks, a twoseason web television series.

in , reeves agreed to reprise his role for a sequel in the john wick franchise, john wick chapter . the story carries on from the first film and follows john wick as he goes on the run when a bounty is placed on him. the film was a critical and commercial success, grossing . million worldwide, more than its predecessor. chris hewitt of empire magazine praised reeves performance, which complemented his previous action roles . however, justin chang of the los angeles times described the picture as a downanddirty bpicture with a lustrous apicture soul. besides to this largescale feature, reeves starred in a drama, to the bone, in which he plays a doctor helping a young woman with anorexia. it premiered at the  sundance film festival, followed by distribution on netflix in july. early reviews were positive, with praise for its nonglamorized portrayal of anorexia, although the new statesman magazine thought it was irresponsible. that year, reeves also made cameo appearances in the films a happening of monumental proportions and spf.reeves reunited with winona ryder in the  comedy destination wedding, about wedding guests who develop a mutual affection for each other. they had worked together previously in bram stokers dracula, a scanner darkly and the private lives of pippa lee. reeves also coproduced and starred in two thrillers. siberia, in which he plays a diamond trader who travels to siberia to search for his russian partner, and replicas, which tells the story of a neuroscientist who violates laws and bioethics to bring his family back to life after they die in a car crash. siberia was critically panned; reviewers thought the plot was nonsensical and reeves had little chemistry with costar ana ularu. replicas did not fare well with critics either; the a.v. club praised reeves performance, but gave the film a grade d, adding it is garbage. it was also a box office failure, earning . million from a budget of  million.returning to the john wick franchise, reeves starred in john wick chapter   parabellum , the third feature in the series directed by stahelski. the film takes place immediately after the events of john wick chapter  and features new cast members including halle berry. the film was another box office hit, grossing  million in the united states and more than  million internationally. the globe and mails reviewer gave the film three out of four stars, praising the fight scenes, but felt there was aesthetic overindulgence with the cinematography. the guardians cath clarke questioned reeves acting; she wrote that he keeps his face statuestill ... three movies in, franchise bloat is beginning to set in. reeves was nominated for favorite male movie star of  in the peoples choice awards, and the film itself was nominated for best contemporary film in the art directors guild awards. reeves then voiced duke caboom in s toy story , the fourth instalment of pixars toy story franchise. in that same year on april  and , a film festival was held in his honour, called keanucon, hosted in glasgow, scotland. over two days, nine of his films were screened for guests.as early as , reeves and alex winter had shown enthusiasm for a third bill  ted film, but the project went into development limbo. finally in , bill  ted face the music, the third film in the franchise was released. the critic from salon magazine was disappointed in reeves performance, but praised the film for its message that music has the power to unite the world. leah greenblatt of entertainment weekly gave the film a grade b, and complimented the onscreen chemistry between reeves and winter. he also appeared in the spongebob movie sponge on the run as a tumbleweed named sage. reeves appears as johnny silverhand in the video game cyberpunk . in december , reeves returned to the screen for the fourth film in the matrix franchise the matrix resurrections. carrieanne moss also reprised her role as trinity. the matrix resurrections was a box office disappointment; one critic praised reeves and moss performances, but thought the film was no gamechanger.lionsgates john wick chapter  premiered on march , ; reeves reprised his role as the title character. he also reprised his role as johnny silverhand in the cyberpunk  expansion, phantom liberty.

in , reeves travelled to so paulo to produce a netflix series, conquest. details are being kept secret. a comic book series, brzrkr, cowritten by reeves was published in march . he is expected to star in a film adaptation of it. a fifth sequel to john wick was planned, but stahelski said he would like to give the franchise a rest for the time being.

in , reeves met director david lynchs assistant jennifer syme at a party thrown for his band dogstar, and they started dating. on december , , syme gave birth eight months into her pregnancy to the couples child, who was stillborn. the couple broke up several weeks afterward, but later reconciled. on april , , syme was killed when her vehicle collided with three parked cars on cahuenga boulevard in los angeles. syme was impaired, and also not belted in. reeves told investigators that they were back together, and had brunch together in san francisco the day before the accident. reeves acted as a pallbearer for syme, who was buried next to their daughter. he was scheduled to film the sequels to the matrix the following spring, but sought peace and time, according to friend bret domrose of dogstar.reeves has also been romantically linked to longtime friend and filmmaker brenda davis, whose child he is godfather to, and modelactress china chow. in , reeves met alexandra grant at a dinner party; they went on to collaborate on two books together. they went public with their relationship in november .reeves is discreet about his spiritual beliefs, saying that it is something personal and private. when asked if he was a spiritual person, he said that he believes in god, faith, inner faith, the self, passion, and things, and that he is very spiritual. although he does not formally practice buddhism, the religion has left a strong impression on him, especially after filming little buddha. he said, most of the things ive come away with from buddhism have been humanunderstanding feelings, impermanence, and trying to understand other people and where theyre coming from.when asked on the late show with stephen colbert in  about his views on what happens after death, reeves replied, i know that the ones who love us will miss us.in , the lipopeptide keanumycin, a substance deadly to fungi, was named in honor of reeves.

reeves supports several charities and causes. in response to his sisters battle with leukemia, he founded a private cancer foundation, which aids childrens hospitals and provides cancer research. in june , he volunteered for camp rainbow gold, an idaho childrens cancer charity. reeves was also recognized as one of the  influential celebrities in oncology by oncodaily. reeves has said, money is the last thing i think about. i could live on what i have already made for the next few centuries. it was rumoured that reeves gave away a substantial portion, estimated to be  million, of his earnings from the matrix to the special effects and makeup crews. however, this has been significantly embellished; reeves negotiated a smaller deal, relinquishing his contractual right to a percentage of the sequels profits in exchange for a more extensive special effects budget.after filming john wick chapter , reeves, chad stahelski and brazilian jiujitsu instructor dave camarillo, signed an exclusive training uniform that was put up for auction in march  to raise money for st. jude childrens research hospital.reeves cofounded a production company, company films, with friend stephen hamel. in , reeves, an avid motorcyclist, cofounded arch motorcycle company, which builds and sells custom motorcycles, with gard hollinger. in , reeves, jessica fleischmann, and alexandra grant founded book publisher, x artists books . he has written two books ode to happiness and shadows, both of which are collaborations with grant; he provided the text to her photographs and art.

in , reevess recitation of the beat poem pull my daisy for a virtual benefit concert for tibet house us, a nonprofit organization affiliated with the exiled tibetan spiritual leader, the dalai lama, angered chinese nationalists. reevess films have been banned from streaming platforms in china such as iqiyi, tencent video and youku.

in a  article for time magazine, lev grossman called reeves hollywoods ultimate introvert. he has been described as a workaholic, charming and excruciatingly shy. during the production of constantine, director francis lawrence commented on his personality, calling him hardworking and generous. his costar shia labeouf said, ive worked with him for a year and a couple of months, but i dont really know him that much. erwin stoff of  arts entertainment has served as reevess agent and manager since he was , and produced many of his films. stoff said reeves is a really private person and keeps his distance from other people.in , an image of reeves became an internet meme after photographs of him were published, sitting on a park bench with a sad facial expression. the images were posted on the chan discussion board and were soon distributed via several blogs and media outlets, leading to the sad keanu meme being spread on the internet. an unofficial holiday was created when a facebook fan page declared june  as cheerup keanu day. he would later downplay the photo, saying, man, i was eating a sandwich. i was thinkingi had some stuff going on. i was hungry.reevess casual persona and ability to establish rapport have been observed by the public, leading him to be dubbed the internets boyfriend. in , vox cited reevess unorthodox filmography and ability to appeal to nerd culture as the primary reasons for his internet popularity. while filming bill  ted face the music in july , reeves and other cast members came across a house with a banner reading youre breathtaking and mini keanu, two memes that had come out of reevess appearance at the electronic entertainment expo  for the game cyberpunk . reeves took time to sign the banner, and talk to the family.reeves appeared on forbes annual celebrity  list in  and , at number  and , respectively. in , reeves received a star on the hollywood walk of fame for his contributions to the motion picture industry. in , the hollywood reporter calculated that reeves had earned  million for the matrix franchise, making him one of the highestpaid actors. in , the new york times ranked him at number four on its list of the  greatest actors of the st century.

prolific in film since , reevess most acclaimed and highestgrossing films, according to the review aggregate site rotten tomatoes, include rivers edge , bill and teds excellent adventure , my own private idaho , much ado about nothing , speed , the matrix , john wick , john wick chapter  , john wick chapter   parabellum , and toy story  . reeves has won four mtv movie awards, and received two best actor nominations at the saturn awards. he was nominated twice for a peoples choice award favorite male movie star and favorite action movie star, for his performance in john wick chapter   parabellum .in september , tae kwon do life magazine deemed reeves the  martial arts movie star in the world based upon his multiple films in the genre, their popularity, and sheer box office gross.

reeves, keanu ; grant, alexandra  . bergam, janey . ode to happiness. gttingen steidl publishers. isbn . oclc .cite book  cs maint multiple names authors list 

reeves, keanu ; grant, alexandra  . shadows a collaborative project by alexandra grant and keanu reeves. gttingen steidl publishers. isbn . oclc .

brzrkr 

russia , or the russian federation, is a country spanning eastern europe and northern asia. it is the largest country in the world by area, extends across eleven time zones, and shares land boundaries with fourteen countries. it is the worlds ninthmost populous country and europes most populous country. the countrys capital and largest city is moscow. saint petersburg is russias secondlargest city and cultural capital. other major urban areas in the country include novosibirsk, yekaterinburg, nizhny novgorod, chelyabinsk, krasnoyarsk, and kazan.

the east slavs emerged as a recognised group in europe between the rd and th centuries ce. the first east slavic state, kievan rus, arose in the th century, and in , it adopted orthodox christianity from the byzantine empire. rus ultimately disintegrated, with the grand duchy of moscow growing to become the tsardom of russia. by the early th century, russia had vastly expanded through conquest, annexation, and the efforts of russian explorers, developing into the russian empire, which remains the thirdlargest empire in history. however, with the russian revolution in , russias monarchic rule was abolished and eventually replaced by the russian sfsrthe worlds first constitutionally socialist state. following the russian civil war, the russian sfsr established the soviet union with three other soviet republics, within which it was the largest and principal constituent. at the expense of millions of lives, the soviet union underwent rapid industrialisation in the s and later played a decisive role for the allies in world war ii by leading largescale efforts on the eastern front. with the onset of the cold war, it competed with the united states for global ideological influence. the soviet era of the th century saw some of the most significant russian technological achievements, including the first humanmade satellite and the first human expedition into outer space.

in , the russian sfsr emerged from the dissolution of the soviet union as the independent russian federation. a new constitution was adopted, which established a federal semipresidential system. since the turn of the century, russias political system has been dominated by vladimir putin, under whom the country has experienced democratic backsliding and a shift towards authoritarianism. russia has been militarily involved in a number of conflicts in neighbouring states, which have included the internationally unrecognised annexations of crimea in  from neighbouring ukraine, followed by the further annexation of four other regions in  during an ongoing invasion.

internationally, russia ranks among the lowest in measurements of democracy, human rights and freedom of the press; the country also has high levels of perceived corruption. the russian economy ranks th by nominal gdp, relying heavily on its abundant natural resources. its mineral and energy sources are the worlds largest, and its figures for oil production and natural gas production rank highly globally. the russian gdp ranks th by per capita; russia possesses the largest stockpile of nuclear weapons and has the thirdhighest military expenditure. the country is a permanent member of the united nations security council; a member state of the g, sco, brics, apec, osce, and wto; and the leading member state of postsoviet organisations such as cis, csto, and eaeu/eeu. russia is home to  unesco world heritage sites.

according to the primary chronicle, the word rus is derived  from the rus people, who were a swedish tribe, and where the three original members of the rurikid dynastry came from.  the finnish word for swedes, ruotsi, has the same origin. 

later archeological studies mostly confirmed this theory.the word russia is a medieval latin name for rus, a medieval state populated primarily by the east slavs. in modern historiography, this state is usually denoted as kievan rus after its capital city.  another medieval latin name for rus was ruthenia.in russian, the current name of the country,  , comes from the byzantine greek name for rus,  . a new form of the name rus,  , was borrowed from the greek term and first attested in , before coming into official use by the th century, though the country was still often referred to by its inhabitants as rus or the russian land until the end of the th century. there are two words in russian which translate to russians in english   , which refers to ethnic russians, and  , which refers to russian citizens, regardless of ethnicity.

the first human settlement on russia dates back to the oldowan period in the early lower paleolithic. about  million years ago, representatives of homo erectus migrated to the taman peninsula in southern russia. flint tools, some . million years old, have been discovered in the north caucasus. radiocarbon dated specimens from denisova cave in the altai mountains estimate the oldest denisovan specimen lived , years ago. fossils of denny, an archaic human hybrid that was half neanderthal and half denisovan, and lived some , years ago, was also found within the latter cave. russia was home to some of the last surviving neanderthals, from about , years ago, found in mezmaiskaya cave.the first trace of an early modern human in russia dates back to , years, in western siberia. the discovery of high concentration cultural remains of anatomically modern humans, from at least , years ago, was found at kostyonkiborshchyovo, and at sungir, dating back to , years agoboth in western russia. humans reached arctic russia at least , years ago, in mamontovaya kurya. ancient north eurasian populations from siberia genetically similar to maltaburet culture and afontova gora were an important genetic contributor to ancient native americans and eastern huntergatherers.

the kurgan hypothesis places the volgadnieper region of southern russia and ukraine as the urheimat of the protoindoeuropeans. early indoeuropean migrations from the ponticcaspian steppe of ukraine and russia spread yamnaya ancestry and indoeuropean languages across large parts of eurasia. nomadic pastoralism developed in the ponticcaspian steppe beginning in the chalcolithic. remnants of these steppe civilizations were discovered in places such as ipatovo, sintashta, arkaim, and pazyryk, which bear the earliest known traces of horses in warfare. the genetic makeup of speakers of the uralic language family in northern europe was shaped by migration from siberia that began at least , years ago.in the rd to th centuries ce, the gothic kingdom of oium existed in southern russia, which was later overrun by huns. between the rd and th centuries ce, the bosporan kingdom, which was a hellenistic polity that succeeded the greek colonies, was also overwhelmed by nomadic invasions led by warlike tribes such as the huns and eurasian avars. the khazars, who were of turkic origin, ruled the steppes between the caucasus in the south, to the east past the volga river basin, and west as far as kyiv on the dnieper river until the th century. after them came the pechenegs who created a large confederacy, which was subsequently taken over by the cumans and the kipchaks.the ancestors of russians are among the slavic tribes that separated from the protoindoeuropeans, who appeared in the northeastern part of europe c.years ago. the east slavs gradually settled western russia  in two waves one moving from kiev towards presentday suzdal and murom and another from polotsk towards novgorod and rostov. prior to slavic migration, that territory was populated by finnishspeaking people. from the th century onwards, the incoming east slavs slowly but peacefully assimilated the native finnic peoples.

the establishment of the first east slavic states in the th century coincided with the arrival of varangians, the vikings who ventured along the waterways extending from the eastern baltic to the black and caspian seas. according to the primary chronicle, a varangian from the rus people, named rurik, was elected ruler of novgorod in . in , his successor oleg ventured south and conquered kiev, which had been previously paying tribute to the khazars. ruriks son igor and igors son sviatoslav subsequently subdued all local east slavic tribes to kievan rule, destroyed the khazar khaganate, and launched several military expeditions to byzantium and persia.in the th to th centuries, kievan rus became one of the largest and most prosperous states in europe. the reigns of vladimir the great  and his son yaroslav the wise  constitute the golden age of kiev, which saw the acceptance of orthodox christianity from byzantium, and the creation of the first east slavic written legal code, the russkaya pravda. the age of feudalism and decentralisation had come, marked by constant infighting between members of the rurik dynasty that ruled kievan rus collectively. kievs dominance waned, to the benefit of vladimirsuzdal in the northeast, the novgorod republic in the north, and galiciavolhynia in the southwest. by the th century, kiev lost its preeminence and kievan rus had fragmented into different principalities. prince andrey bogolyubsky sacked kiev in  and made vladimir his base, leading to political power being shifted to the northeast.led by prince alexander nevsky, novgorodians repelled the invading swedes in the battle of the neva in , as well as the germanic crusaders in the battle on the ice in .kievan rus finally fell to the mongol invasion of , which resulted in the sacking of kiev and other cities, as well as the death of a major part of the population. the invaders, later known as tatars, formed the state of the golden horde, which ruled over russia for the next two centuries. only the novgorod republic escaped foreign occupation after it surrendered and agreed to pay tribute to the mongols. galiciavolhynia would later be absorbed by lithuania and poland, while the novgorod republic continued to prosper in the north. in the northeast, the byzantineslavic traditions of kievan rus were adapted to form the russian autocratic state.

the destruction of kievan rus saw the eventual rise of the grand duchy of moscow, initially a part of vladimirsuzdal. while still under the domain of the mongoltatars and with their connivance, moscow began to assert its influence in the region in the early th century, gradually becoming the leading force in the gathering of the russian lands. when the seat of the metropolitan of the russian orthodox church moved to moscow in , its influence increased. moscows last rival, the novgorod republic, prospered as the chief fur trade centre and the easternmost port of the hanseatic league.led by prince dmitry donskoy of moscow, the united army of russian principalities inflicted a milestone defeat on the mongoltatars in the battle of kulikovo in . moscow gradually absorbed its parent duchy and surrounding principalities, including formerly strong rivals such as tver and novgorod.ivan iii  threw off the control of the golden horde and consolidated the whole of northern rus under moscows dominion, and was the first russian ruler to take the title grand duke of all rus. after the fall of constantinople in , moscow claimed succession to the legacy of the eastern roman empire. ivan iii married sophia palaiologina, the niece of the last byzantine emperor constantine xi, and made the byzantine doubleheaded eagle his own, and eventually russias, coatofarms. vasili iii united all of russia by annexing the last few independent russian states in the early th century.

in development of the third rome ideas, the grand duke ivan iv  was officially crowned the first tsar of russia in . the tsar promulgated a new code of laws , established the first russian feudal representative body , revamped the military, curbed the influence of the clergy, and reorganised local government. during his long reign, ivan nearly doubled the already large russian territory by annexing the three tatar khanates kazan and astrakhan along the volga, and the khanate of sibir in southwestern siberia. ultimately, by the end of the th century, russia expanded east of the ural mountains. however, the tsardom was weakened by the long and unsuccessful livonian war against the coalition of the kingdom of poland and the grand duchy of lithuania , the kingdom of sweden, and denmarknorway for access to the baltic coast and sea trade. in , an invading army of crimean tatars were thoroughly defeated in the crucial battle of molodi.the death of ivans sons marked the end of the ancient rurik dynasty in , and in combination with the disastrous famine of , led to a civil war, the rule of pretenders, and foreign intervention during the time of troubles in the early th century. the polishlithuanian commonwealth, taking advantage, occupied parts of russia, extending into the capital moscow. in , the poles were forced to retreat by the russian volunteer corps, led by merchant kuzma minin and prince dmitry pozharsky. the romanov dynasty acceded to the throne in  by the decision of the zemsky sobor, and the country started its gradual recovery from the crisis.russia continued its territorial growth through the th century, which was the age of the cossacks. in , the ukrainian leader, bohdan khmelnytsky, offered to place ukraine under the protection of the russian tsar, alexis; whose acceptance of this offer led to another russopolish war. ultimately, ukraine was split along the dnieper, leaving the eastern part,  under russian rule. in the east, the rapid russian exploration and colonisation of vast siberia continued, hunting for valuable furs and ivory. russian explorers pushed eastward primarily along the siberian river routes, and by the midth century, there were russian settlements in eastern siberia, on the chukchi peninsula, along the amur river, and on the coast of the pacific ocean. in , semyon dezhnyov became the first european to navigate through the bering strait.

under peter the great, russia was proclaimed an empire in , and established itself as one of the european great powers. ruling from  to , peter defeated sweden in the great northern war , securing russias access to the sea and sea trade. in , on the baltic sea, peter founded saint petersburg as russias new capital. throughout his rule, sweeping reforms were made, which brought significant western european cultural influences to russia. the reign of peter is daughter elizabeth in  saw russias participation in the seven years war . during the conflict, russian troops overran east prussia, reaching berlin. however, upon elizabeths death, all these conquests were returned to the kingdom of prussia by proprussian peter iii of russia.catherine ii , who ruled in , presided over the russian age of enlightenment. she extended russian political control over the polishlithuanian commonwealth and annexed most of its territories into russia, making it the most populous country in europe. in the south, after the successful russoturkish wars against the ottoman empire, catherine advanced russias boundary to the black sea, by dissolving the crimean khanate, and annexing crimea. as a result of victories over qajar iran through the russopersian wars, by the first half of the th century, russia also conquered the caucasus. catherines successor, her son paul, was unstable and focused predominantly on domestic issues. following his short reign, catherines strategy was continued with alexander is  wresting of finland from the weakened sweden in , and of bessarabia from the ottomans in . in north america, the russians became the first europeans to reach and colonise alaska. in , the first russian circumnavigation was made. in , a russian expedition discovered the continent of antarctica.

during the napoleonic wars, russia joined alliances with various european powers, and fought against france. the french invasion of russia at the height of napoleons power in  reached moscow, but eventually failed as the obstinate resistance in combination with the bitterly cold russian winter led to a disastrous defeat of invaders, in which the paneuropean grande arme faced utter destruction. led by mikhail kutuzov and michael andreas barclay de tolly, the imperial russian army ousted napoleon and drove throughout europe in the war of the sixth coalition, ultimately entering paris. alexander i controlled russias delegation at the congress of vienna, which defined the map of postnapoleonic europe.

the officers who pursued napoleon into western europe brought ideas of liberalism back to russia, and attempted to curtail the tsars powers during the abortive decembrist revolt of . at the end of the conservative reign of nicholas i , a zenith period of russias power and influence in europe, was disrupted by defeat in the crimean war.

nicholass successor alexander ii  enacted significant changes throughout the country, including the emancipation reform of . these reforms spurred industrialisation, and modernised the imperial russian army, which liberated much of the balkans from ottoman rule in the aftermath of the  russoturkish war. during most of the th and early th century, russia and britain colluded over afghanistan and its neighbouring territories in central and south asia; the rivalry between the two major european empires came to be known as the great game.the late th century saw the rise of various socialist movements in russia. alexander ii was assassinated in  by revolutionary terrorists. the reign of his son alexander iii  was less liberal but more peaceful.

under last russian emperor, nicholas ii , the revolution of  was triggered by the failure of the humiliating russojapanese war.  the uprising was put down, but the government was forced to concede major reforms , including granting freedoms of speech and assembly, the legalisation of political parties, and the creation of an elected legislative body, the state duma.

in , russia entered world war i in response to austriahungarys declaration of war on russias ally serbia, and fought across multiple fronts while isolated from its triple entente allies. in , the brusilov offensive of the imperial russian army almost completely destroyed the austrohungarian army. however, the alreadyexisting public distrust of the regime was deepened by the rising costs of war, high casualties, and rumors of corruption and treason. all this formed the climate for the russian revolution of , carried out in two major acts. in early , nicholas ii was forced to abdicate; he and his family were imprisoned and later executed during the russian civil war. the monarchy was replaced by a shaky coalition of political parties that declared itself the provisional government, and proclaimed the russian republic. on  january o.s.  january, , the russian constituent assembly declared russia a democratic federal republic . the next day the constituent assembly was dissolved by the allrussian central executive committee.an alternative socialist establishment coexisted, the petrograd soviet, wielding power through the democratically elected councils of workers and peasants, called soviets. the rule of the new authorities only aggravated the crisis in the country instead of resolving it, and eventually, the october revolution, led by bolshevik leader vladimir lenin, overthrew the provisional government and gave full governing power to the soviets, leading to the creation of the worlds first socialist state. the russian civil war broke out between the anticommunist white movement and the bolsheviks with its red army. in the aftermath of signing the treaty of brestlitovsk that concluded hostilities with the central powers of world war i; bolshevist russia surrendered most of its western territories, which hosted  of its population,  of its industries,  of its agricultural land, and roughly  of its coal mines.

the allied powers launched an unsuccessful military intervention in support of anticommunist forces. in the meantime, both the bolsheviks and white movement carried out campaigns of deportations and executions against each other, known respectively as the red terror and white terror. by the end of the violent civil war, russias economy and infrastructure were heavily damaged, and as many as  million perished during the war, mostly civilians. millions became white migrs, and the russian famine of  claimed up to five million victims.

on  december , lenin and his aides formed the soviet union, by joining the russian sfsr into a single state with the byelorussian, transcaucasian, and ukrainian republics. eventually internal border changes and annexations during world war ii created a union of  republics; the largest in size and population being the russian sfsr, which dominated the union for its entire history politically, culturally, and economically.following lenins death in , a troika was designated to take charge. eventually joseph stalin, the general secretary of the communist party, managed to suppress all opposition factions and consolidate power in his hands to become the countrys dictator by the s. leon trotsky, the main proponent of world revolution, was exiled from the soviet union in , and stalins idea of socialism in one country became the official line. the continued internal struggle in the bolshevik party culminated in the great purge.

under stalins leadership, the government launched a command economy, industrialisation of the largely rural country, and collectivisation of its agriculture. during this period of rapid economic and social change, millions of people were sent to penal labour camps, including many political convicts for their suspected or real opposition to stalins rule; and millions were deported and exiled to remote areas of the soviet union. the transitional disorganisation of the countrys agriculture, combined with the harsh state policies and a drought, led to the soviet famine of ; which killed up to . million, . million of them in the russian sfsr. the soviet union, ultimately, made the costly transformation from a largely agrarian economy to a major industrial powerhouse within a short span of time.

the soviet union entered world war ii on  september  with its invasion of poland, in accordance with a secret protocol within the molotovribbentrop pact with nazi germany. the soviet union later invaded finland, and occupied and annexed the baltic states, as well as parts of romania. on  june , germany invaded the soviet union, opening the eastern front, the largest theater of world war ii.eventually, some  million red army troops were captured by the nazis; the latter deliberately starved to death or otherwise killed . million soviet pows, and a vast number of civilians, as the hunger plan sought to fulfil generalplan ost. although the wehrmacht had considerable early success, their attack was halted in the battle of moscow. subsequently, the germans were dealt major defeats first at the battle of stalingrad in the winter of , and then in the battle of kursk in the summer of . another german failure was the siege of leningrad, in which the city was fully blockaded on land between  and  by german and finnish forces, and suffered starvation and more than a million deaths, but never surrendered. soviet forces steamrolled through eastern and central europe in  and captured berlin in may . in august , the red army invaded manchuria and ousted the japanese from northeast asia, contributing to the allied victory over japan.the  period of world war ii is known in russia as the great patriotic war. the soviet union, along with the united states, the united kingdom and china were considered the big four of allied powers in world war ii, and later became the four policemen, which was the foundation of the united nations security council. during the war, soviet civilian and military death were about  million, accounting for about half of all world war ii casualties. the soviet economy and infrastructure suffered massive devastation, which caused the soviet famine of . however, at the expense of a large sacrifice, the soviet union emerged as a global superpower.

after world war ii, parts of eastern and central europe, including east germany and eastern parts of austria were occupied by red army according to the potsdam conference.  dependent communist governments were installed in the eastern bloc satellite states. after becoming the worlds second nuclear power, the soviet union established the warsaw pact alliance, and entered into a struggle for global dominance, known as the cold war, with the rivalling united states and nato.

after stalins death in  and a short period of collective rule, the new leader nikita khrushchev denounced stalin and launched the policy of destalinization, releasing many political prisoners from the gulag labour camps. the general easement of repressive policies became known later as the khrushchev thaw. at the same time, cold war tensions reached its peak when the two rivals clashed over the deployment of the united states jupiter missiles in turkey and soviet missiles in cuba.in , the soviet union launched the worlds first artificial satellite, sputnik , thus starting the space age. russian cosmonaut yuri gagarin became the first human to orbit the earth, aboard the vostok  crewed spacecraft on  april .

following the ousting of khrushchev in , another period of collective rule ensued, until leonid brezhnev became the leader. the era of the s and the early s was later designated as the era of stagnation. the  kosygin reform aimed for partial decentralisation of the soviet economy. in , after a communistled revolution in afghanistan, soviet forces invaded the country, ultimately starting the sovietafghan war. in may , the soviets started to withdraw from afghanistan, due to international opposition, persistent antisoviet guerrilla warfare, and a lack of support by soviet citizens.

from  onwards, the last soviet leader mikhail gorbachev, who sought to enact liberal reforms in the soviet system, introduced the policies of glasnost  and perestroika  in an attempt to end the period of economic stagnation and to democratise the government. this, however, led to the rise of strong nationalist and separatist movements across the country. prior to , the soviet economy was the worlds secondlargest, but during its final years, it went into a crisis.by , economic and political turmoil began to boil over as the baltic states chose to secede from the soviet union. on  march, a referendum was held, in which the vast majority of participating citizens voted in favour of changing the soviet union into a renewed federation. in june , boris yeltsin became the first directly elected president in russian history when he was elected president of the russian sfsr. in august , a coup dtat attempt by members of gorbachevs government, directed against gorbachev and aimed at preserving the soviet union, instead led to the end of the communist party of the soviet union. on  december , following the dissolution of the soviet union, along with contemporary russia, fourteen other postsoviet states emerged.

the economic and political collapse of the soviet union led russia into a deep and prolonged depression. during and after the disintegration of the soviet union, wideranging reforms including privatisation and market and trade liberalisation were undertaken, including radical changes along the lines of shock therapy. the privatisation largely shifted control of enterprises from state agencies to individuals with inside connections in the government, which led to the rise of the infamous russian oligarchs. many of the newly rich moved billions in cash and assets outside of the country in an enormous capital flight. the depression of the economy led to the collapse of social servicesthe birth rate plummeted while the death rate skyrocketed, and millions plunged into poverty; while extreme corruption, as well as criminal gangs and organised crime rose significantly.in late , tensions between yeltsin and the russian parliament culminated in a constitutional crisis which ended violently through military force. during the crisis, yeltsin was backed by western governments, and over  people were killed.

in december, a referendum was held and approved, which introduced a new constitution, giving the president enormous powers. the s were plagued by armed conflicts in the north caucasus, both local ethnic skirmishes and separatist islamist insurrections. from the time chechen separatists declared independence in the early s, an intermittent guerrilla war was fought between the rebel groups and russian forces. terrorist attacks against civilians were carried out by chechen separatists, claiming the lives of thousands of russian civilians.after the dissolution of the soviet union, russia assumed responsibility for settling the latters external debts. in , most consumer price controls were eliminated, causing extreme inflation and significantly devaluing the rouble. high budget deficits coupled with increasing capital flight and inability to pay back debts, caused the  russian financial crisis, which resulted in a further gdp decline.

on  december , president yeltsin unexpectedly resigned, handing the post to the recently appointed prime minister and his chosen successor, vladimir putin. putin then won the  presidential election, and defeated the chechen insurgency in the second chechen war.putin won a second presidential term in . high oil prices and a rise in foreign investment saw the russian economy and living standards improve significantly. putins rule increased stability, while transforming russia into an authoritarian state. in , putin took the post of prime minister, while dmitry medvedev was elected president for one term, to hold onto power despite legal term limits; this period has been described as a tandemocracy.

following a diplomatic crisis with neighbouring georgia, the russogeorgian war took place during  august , resulting in russia recognising two separatist states in the territories that it occupies in georgia. it was the first european war of the st century.

in early , following a revolution in ukraine, russia occupied and annexed crimea from neighbouring ukraine following a disputed referendum, with russian troops later participating in a war in eastern ukraine between russianbacked separatists and ukrainian troops. in a major escalation of the conflict, russia launched a fullscale invasion of ukraine on  february . the invasion marked the largest conventional war in europe since world war ii, and was met with international condemnation, as well as expanded sanctions against russia. as a result, russia was expelled from the council of europe in march, and was suspended from the united nations human rights council in april. in september, following successful ukrainian counteroffensives, putin announced a partial mobilisation, russias first mobilisation since world war ii. by the end of september, putin proclaimed the annexation of four ukrainian regions, the largest annexation in europe since world war ii. putin and russianinstalled leaders signed treaties of accession, internationally unrecognized and widely denounced as illegal, despite the fact that russian forces have been unable to fully occupy any of the four regions. a number of supranational and national parliaments passed resolutions declaring russia to be a state sponsor of terrorism. in addition, russia was declared a terrorist state by latvia, lithuania and estonia. hundreds of thousands are estimated to have been killed as a result of the invasion. the war in ukraine has further exacerbated russias demographic crisis.in june , the wagner group, a private military contractor fighting for russia in ukraine, declared an open rebellion against the russian ministry of defense, capturing rostovondon, before beginning a march on moscow. however, after negotiations between wagner and the belarusian government, the rebellion was called off.

russias vast landmass stretches over the easternmost part of europe and the northernmost part of asia. it spans the northernmost edge of eurasia; and has the worlds fourthlongest coastline, of over , km . russia lies between latitudes  and  n, and longitudes  e and  w, extending some , km  east to west, and , to , km  north to south. russia, by landmass, is larger than three continents, and has the same surface area as pluto.russia has nine major mountain ranges, and they are found along the southernmost regions, which share a significant portion of the caucasus mountains ; the altai and sayan mountains in siberia; and in the east siberian mountains and the kamchatka peninsula in the russian far east . the ural mountains, running north to south through the countrys west, are rich in mineral resources, and form the traditional boundary between europe and asia. the lowest point in russia and europe, is situated at the head of the caspian sea, where the caspian depression reaches some  metres  below sea level.russia, as one of the worlds only three countries bordering three oceans, has links with a great number of seas. its major islands and archipelagos include novaya zemlya, franz josef land, severnaya zemlya, the new siberian islands, wrangel island, the kuril islands , and sakhalin. the diomede islands, administered by russia and the united states, are just . km  apart; and kunashir island of the kuril islands is merely  km  from hokkaido, japan.russia, home of over , rivers, has one of the worlds largest surface water resources, with its lakes containing approximately onequarter of the worlds liquid fresh water. lake baikal, the largest and most prominent among russias fresh water bodies, is the worlds deepest, purest, oldest and most capacious fresh water lake, containing over onefifth of the worlds fresh surface water. ladoga and onega in northwestern russia are two of the largest lakes in europe. russia is second only to brazil by total renewable water resources. the volga in western russia, widely regarded as russias national river, is the longest river in europe; and forms the volga delta, the largest river delta in the continent. the siberian rivers of ob, yenisey, lena, and amur are among the worlds longest rivers.

the size of russia and the remoteness of many of its areas from the sea result in the dominance of the humid continental climate throughout most of the country, except for the tundra and the extreme southwest. mountain ranges in the south and east obstruct the flow of warm air masses from the indian and pacific oceans, while the european plain spanning its west and north opens it to influence from the atlantic and arctic oceans. most of northwest russia and siberia have a subarctic climate, with extremely severe winters in the inner regions of northeast siberia , and more moderate winters elsewhere. russias vast coastline along the arctic ocean and the russian arctic islands have a polar climate.the coastal part of krasnodar krai on the black sea, most notably sochi, and some coastal and interior strips of the north caucasus possess a humid subtropical climate with mild and wet winters.  in many regions of east siberia and the russian far east, winter is dry compared to summer; while other parts of the country experience more even precipitation across seasons. winter precipitation in most parts of the country usually falls as snow. the westernmost parts of kaliningrad oblast and some parts in the south of krasnodar krai and the north caucasus have an oceanic climate. the region along the lower volga and caspian sea coast, as well as some southernmost slivers of siberia, possess a semiarid climate.throughout much of the territory, there are only two distinct seasons, winter and summer; as spring and autumn are usually brief periods of change between extremely low and extremely high temperatures. the coldest month is january ; the warmest is usually july. great ranges of temperature are typical. in winter, temperatures get colder both from south to north and from west to east. summers can be quite hot, even in siberia. climate change in russia is causing more frequent wildfires, and thawing the countrys large expanse of permafrost.

russia, owing to its gigantic size, has diverse ecosystems, including polar deserts, tundra, forest tundra, taiga, mixed and broadleaf forest, forest steppe, steppe, semidesert, and subtropics. about half of russias territory is forested, and it has the worlds largest area of forest, which sequester some of the worlds highest amounts of carbon dioxide.russian biodiversity includes , species of vascular plants, , species of bryophytes, about , species of lichens, ,, species of algae, and ,, species of fungi. russian fauna is composed of  species of mammals, over  species of birds,  species of reptiles, about  species of amphibians,  species of freshwater fish , approximately , species of saltwater fishes,  species of cyclostomata, and approximately , invertebrates . approximately , rare and endangered plant and animal species are included in the russian red data book.russias entirely natural ecosystems are conserved in nearly , specially protected natural territories of various statuses, occupying more than  of the countrys total area. they include  biosphere reserves,  national parks, and  nature reserves. although in decline, the country still has many ecosystems which are still considered intact forest; mainly in the northern taiga areas, and the subarctic tundra of siberia. russia had a forest landscape integrity index mean score of . in , ranking th out of  countries; and the first ranked major nation globally.

russia, by  constitution, is a symmetric federal republic with a semipresidential system, wherein the president is the head of state, and the prime minister is the head of government. it is structured as a multiparty representative democracy, with the federal government composed of three branches

legislative the bicameral federal assembly of russia, made up of the member state duma and the member federation council, adopts federal law, declares war, approves treaties, has the power of the purse and the power of impeachment of the president.

executive the president is the commanderinchief of the armed forces, and appoints the government of russia  and other officers, who administer and enforce federal laws and policies. the president may issue decrees of unlimited scope, so long as they do not contradict the constitution or federal law.

judiciary the constitutional court, supreme court and lower federal courts, whose judges are appointed by the federation council on the recommendation of the president, interpret laws and can overturn laws they deem unconstitutional.the president is elected by popular vote for a sixyear term and may be elected no more than twice. ministries of the government are composed of the premier and his deputies, ministers, and selected other individuals; all are appointed by the president on the recommendation of the prime minister . united russia is the dominant political party in russia, and has been described as big tent and the party of power. under the administrations of vladimir putin, russia has experienced democratic backsliding, and has become an authoritarian state under a dictatorship, with putins policies being referred to as putinism.

russia, by  constitution, is a symmetric  federation. unlike the soviet asymmetric model of the rsfsr, where only republics were subjects of the federation, the current constitution raised the status of other regions to the level of republics and made all regions equal with the title subject of the federation. the regions of russia have reserved areas of competence, but no regions have sovereignty, do not have the status of a sovereign state, do not have the right to indicate any sovereignty in their constitutions and do not have the right to secede from the country. the laws of the regions cannot contradict federal laws.the federal subjects have equal representationtwo delegates eachin the federation council, the upper house of the federal assembly. they do, however, differ in the degree of autonomy they enjoy. the federal districts of russia were established by putin in  to facilitate central government control of the federal subjects. originally seven, currently there are eight federal districts, each headed by an envoy appointed by the president.

russia had the worlds fifthlargest diplomatic network in . it maintains diplomatic relations with  united nations member states, four partiallyrecognised states, and three united nations observer states; along with  embassies. russia is one of the five permanent members of the united nations security council. it has historically been a great power, and a former superpower as the leading constituent of the former soviet union. russia is a member of the g, the osce, and the apec. russia also takes a leading role in organisations such as the cis, the eaeu, the csto, the sco, and brics.russia maintains close relations with neighbouring belarus, which is a part of the union state, a supranational confederation of the two states. serbia has been a historically close ally of russia, as both countries share a strong mutual cultural, ethnic, and religious affinity. india is the largest customer of russian military equipment, and the two countries share a strong strategic and diplomatic relationship since the soviet era. russia wields influence across the geopolitically important south caucasus and central asia; and the two regions have been described as russias backyard.

in the st century russia has pursued an aggressive foreign policy aimed at securing regional dominance and international influence, as well as increasing domestic support for the government. military intervention in the postsoviet states include a war with georgia in , and the invasion and destabilisation of ukraine beginning in . russia has also sought to increase its influence in the middle east, most significantly through military intervention in the syrian civil war. cyberwarfare and airspace violations, along with electoral interference, have been used to increase perceptions of russian power. russias relations with neighbouring ukraine and the western worldespecially the united states, the european union, the united nations and natohave collapsed; especially following the start of the russoukrainian war in  and the consequent escalation in . relations between russia and china have significantly strengthened bilaterally and economically; due to shared political interests. turkey and russia share a complex strategic, energy, and defence relationship. russia maintains cordial relations with iran, as it is a strategic and economic ally. russia has also increasingly pushed to expand its influence across the arctic, asiapacific, africa, the middle east, and latin america. according to the economist intelligence unit, twothirds of the worlds population live in countries such as china or india that are neutral or leaning towards russia.

the russian armed forces are divided into the ground forces, the navy, and the aerospace forcesand there are also two independent arms of service the strategic missile troops and the airborne troops. as of , the military have around a million activeduty personnel, which is the worlds fifthlargest, and about  million reserve personnel. it is mandatory for all male citizens aged  to be drafted for a year of service in the armed forces.russia is among the five recognised nuclearweapons states, with the worlds largest stockpile of nuclear weapons; over half of the worlds nuclear weapons are owned by russia. russia possesses the secondlargest fleet of ballistic missile submarines, and is one of the only three countries operating strategic bombers. russia maintains the worlds thirdhighest military expenditure, spending . billion in , corresponding to around . of its gdp. in  it was the worlds secondlargest arms exporter, and had a large and entirely indigenous defence industry, producing most of its own military equipment.

violations of human rights in russia have been increasingly criticised by leading democracy and human rights groups. in particular, amnesty international and human rights watch say that russia is not democratic and allows few political rights and civil liberties to its citizens.since , freedom house has ranked russia as not free in its freedom in the world survey. since , the economist intelligence unit has ranked russia as an authoritarian regime in its democracy index, ranking it th out of  countries in . in regards to media freedom, russia was ranked th out of  countries in reporters without borders press freedom index for . the russian government has been widely criticised by political dissidents and human rights activists for unfair elections, crackdowns on opposition political parties and protests, persecution of nongovernmental organisations and enforced suppression and killings of independent journalists, and censorship of mass media and internet.muslims, especially salafis, have faced persecution in russia. to quash the insurgency in the north caucasus, russian authorities have been accused of indiscriminate killings, arrests, forced disappearances, and torture of civilians. in dagestan, some salafis along with facing government harassment based on their appearance, have had their homes blown up in counterinsurgency operations. chechens and ingush in russian prisons reportedly take more abuse than other ethnic groups. during the  invasion of ukraine, russia has set up filtration camps where many ukrainians are subjected to abuses and forcibly sent to russia; the camps have been compared to those used in the chechen wars.russia has introduced several restrictions on lgbt rights, including a  ban on samesex marriage and the designation of lgbt organisations such as the russian lgbt network as foreign agents.

russias autocratic political system has been variously described as a kleptocracy, an oligarchy, and a plutocracy. it was the lowest rated european country in transparency internationals corruption perceptions index for , ranking th out of  countries. russia has a long history of corruption, which is seen as a significant problem. it impacts various sectors, including the economy, business, public administration, law enforcement, healthcare, education, and the military.

the primary and fundamental statement of laws in russia is the constitution of the russian federation. statutes, like the russian civil code and the russian criminal code, are the predominant legal sources of russian law.russia has the worlds second largest illegal arms trade market, after the united states, is ranked first in europe and nd globally in the global organized crime index, and is among the countries with the highest number of people in prison.

russia has a market economy, with enormous natural resources, particularly oil and natural gas. it has the worlds ninthlargest economy by nominal gdp and the sixthlargest by ppp. the large service sector accounts for  of total gdp, followed by the industrial sector , while the agricultural sector is the smallest, making up only  of total gdp. russia has a low official unemployment rate of .. its foreign exchange reserves are the worlds fifthlargest, worth  billion. it has a labour force of roughly  million, which is the worlds sixthlargest.russia is the worlds thirteenthlargest exporter and the stlargest importer. it relies heavily on revenues from oil and gasrelated taxes and export tariffs, which accounted for  of russias federal budget revenues in january , and up to  of its exports in . russia has one of the lowest levels of external debt among major economies, although its inequality of household income and wealth is one of the highest among developed countries. high regional disparity is also an issue.after over a decade of postsoviet rapid economic growth, backed by high oilprices and a surge in foreign exchange reserves and investment, russias economy was damaged following the start of the russoukrainian war and the annexation of crimea in , due to the first wave of western sanctions being imposed. in the aftermath of the russian invasion of ukraine in , the country has faced revamped sanctions and corporate boycotts, becoming the most sanctioned country in the world, in a move described as an allout economic and financial war to isolate the russian economy from the western financial system. due to the impact, the russian government has stopped publishing a raft of economic data since april . economists suggest the sanctions will have a longterm effect over the russian economy.

railway transport in russia is mostly under the control of the staterun russian railways. the total length of commonused railway tracks is the worlds thirdlongest, and exceeds , km . as of , russia has the worlds fifthlargest road network, with . million km of roads, while its road density is among the worlds lowest. russias inland waterways are the worlds longest, and total , km . among russias , airports, the busiest is sheremetyevo international airport in moscow. russias largest port is the port of novorossiysk in krasnodar krai along the black sea.russia was widely described as an energy superpower. it has the worlds largest proven gas reserves, the secondlargest coal reserves, the eighthlargest oil reserves, and the largest oil shale reserves in europe. russia is also the worlds leading natural gas exporter, the secondlargest natural gas producer, and the secondlargest oil producer and exporter. russias oil and gas production led to deep economic relationships with the european union, china, and former soviet and eastern bloc states. for example, over the last decade, russias share of supplies to total european union  gas demand increased from  in  to  in the weeks before the russian invasion of ukraine in february .in the mids, the share of the oil and gas sector in gdp was around , and in  it was  of gdp. the share of oil and gas in russias exports  and federal budget revenues  is large, and the dynamics of russias gdp are highly dependent on oil and gas prices, but the share in gdp is much less than . according to the first such comprehensive assessment published by the russian statistics agency rosstat in , the maximum total share of the oil and gas sector in russias gdp, including extraction, refining, transport, sale of oil and gas, all goods and services used, and all supporting activities, amounts to . in  and . in . this is comparable to the share of gdp in norway and kazakhstan. it is much lower than the share of gdp in saudi arabia and the united arab emirates.russia ratified the paris agreement in . greenhouse gas emissions by russia are the worlds fourthlargest. russia is the worlds fourthlargest electricity producer. it was also the worlds first country to develop civilian nuclear power, and to construct the worlds first nuclear power plant. russia was also the worlds fourthlargest nuclear energy producer in , and was the fifthlargest hydroelectric producer in .

russias agriculture sector contributes about  of the countrys total gdp, although the sector employs about oneeighth of the total labour force. it has the worlds thirdlargest cultivated area, at ,, square kilometres . however, due to the harshness of its environment, about . of its land is agricultural, and only . of its land is arable. the countrys agricultural land is considered part of the breadbasket of europe. more than onethird of the sown area is devoted to fodder crops, and the remaining farmland is devoted to industrial crops, vegetables, and fruits. the main product of russian farming has always been grain, which occupies considerably more than half of the cropland. russia is the worlds largest exporter of wheat, the largest producer of barley and buckwheat, among the largest exporters of maize and sunflower oil, and the leading producer of fertilizer.various analysts of climate change adaptation foresee large opportunities for russian agriculture during the rest of the st century as arability increases in siberia, which would lead to both internal and external migration to the region. owing to its large coastline along three oceans and twelve marginal seas, russia maintains the worlds sixthlargest fishing industry; capturing nearly  million tons of fish in . it is home to the worlds finest caviar, the beluga; and produces about onethird of all canned fish, and some onefourth of the worlds total fresh and frozen fish.

russia spent about  of its gdp on research and development in , with the worlds tenthhighest budget. it also ranked tenth worldwide in the number of scientific publications in , with roughly . million papers. since , nobel prize were awarded to  soviets and russians in physics, chemistry, medicine, economy, literature and peace. russia ranked st in the global innovation index in , down from th in .since the times of nikolay lobachevsky, who pioneered the noneuclidean geometry, and pafnuty chebyshev, a prominent tutor; russian mathematicians became among the worlds most influential. dmitry mendeleev invented the periodic table, the main framework of modern chemistry. nine soviet and russian mathematicians have been awarded with the fields medal. grigori perelman was offered the first ever clay millennium prize problems award for his final proof of the poincar conjecture in , as well as the fields medal in .alexander popov was among the inventors of radio, while nikolai basov and alexander prokhorov were coinventors of laser and maser. oleg losev made crucial contributions in the field of semiconductor junctions, and discovered lightemitting diodes. vladimir vernadsky is considered one of the founders of geochemistry, biogeochemistry, and radiogeology. lie metchnikoff is known for his groundbreaking research in immunology. ivan pavlov is known chiefly for his work in classical conditioning. lev landau made fundamental contributions to many areas of theoretical physics.nikolai vavilov was best known for having identified the centres of origin of cultivated plants. trofim lysenko was known mainly for lysenkoism. many famous russian scientists and inventors were migrs. igor sikorsky was an aviation pioneer. vladimir zworykin was the inventor of the iconoscope and kinescope television systems. theodosius dobzhansky was the central figure in the field of evolutionary biology for his work in shaping the modern synthesis. george gamow was one of the foremost advocates of the big bang theory.

roscosmos is russias national space agency. the countrys achievements in the field of space technology and space exploration can be traced back to konstantin tsiolkovsky, the father of theoretical astronautics, whose works had inspired leading soviet rocket engineers, such as sergey korolyov, valentin glushko, and many others who contributed to the success of the soviet space program in the early stages of the space race and beyond.,in , the first earthorbiting artificial satellite, sputnik , was launched. in , the first human trip into space was successfully made by yuri gagarin. many other soviet and russian space exploration records ensued. in , valentina tereshkova became the first and youngest woman in space, having flown a solo mission on vostok . in , alexei leonov became the first human to conduct a spacewalk, exiting the space capsule during voskhod .in , laika, a soviet space dog, became the first animal to orbit the earth, aboard sputnik . in , luna  became the first spacecraft to achieve a survivable landing on a celestial body, the moon. in , zond  brought the first earthlings  to circumnavigate the moon. in , venera  became the first spacecraft to land on another planet, venus. in , mars  became the first spacecraft to land on mars. during the same period, lunokhod  became the first space exploration rover, while salyut  became the worlds first space station.russia had  active satellites in space in april , the worlds thirdhighest. between the final flight of the space shuttle program in  and the  spacexs first crewed mission, soyuz rockets were the only launch vehicles able for transporting astronauts to the iss. luna  launched in august , is the first of the lunaglob moon exploration programme.

according to the world tourism organization, russia was the sixteenthmost visited country in the world, and the tenthmost visited country in europe, in , with over . million visits. according to federal agency for tourism, the number of inbound trips of foreign citizens to russia amounted to . million in . russias international tourism receipts in  amounted to . billion. in , travel and tourism accounted for about . of countrys total gdp.major tourist routes in russia include a journey around the golden ring of russia, a theme route of ancient russian cities, cruises on large rivers such as the volga, hikes on mountain ranges such as the caucasus mountains, and journeys on the famous transsiberian railway. russias most visited and popular landmarks include red square, the peterhof palace, the kazan kremlin, the trinity lavra of st. sergius and lake baikal.moscow, the nations cosmopolitan capital and historic core, is a bustling megacity. it retains its classical and sovietera architecture; while boasting high art, world class ballet, and modern skyscrapers. saint petersburg, the imperial capital, is famous for its classical architecture, cathedrals, museums and theatres, white nights, crisscrossing rivers and numerous canals. russia is famed worldwide for its rich museums, such as the state russian, the state hermitage, and the tretyakov gallery; and for theatres such as the bolshoi and the mariinsky. the moscow kremlin and the saint basils cathedral are among the cultural landmarks of russia.

russia is one of the worlds most sparsely populated and urbanised countries, with the vast majority of its population concentrated within its western part. it had a population of . million according to the  census, which rose to . million as of the  census . russia is the most populous country in europe, and the worlds ninth most populous country, with a population density of  inhabitants per square kilometre .since the s, russias death rate has exceeded its birth rate, which some analysts have called a demographic crisis. in , the total fertility rate across russia was estimated to be . children born per woman, which is below the replacement rate of ., and is one of the worlds lowest fertility rates. subsequently, the nation has one of the worlds oldest populations, with a median age of . years. in , it recorded annual population growth for the first time in fifteen years, and subsequently experienced annual population growth due to declining death rates, increased birth rates, and increased immigration.however, since , russias population gains have been reversed, as excessive deaths from the covid pandemic resulted in its largest peacetime decline in history. following the russian invasion of ukraine in , the demographic crisis in the country has deepened, as the country has reportedly suffered high military fatalities while facing renewed brain drain and human capital flight caused by western masssanctions and boycotts.russia is a multinational state with many subnational entities associated with different minorities. there are over  ethnic groups nationwide. in the  census, roughly  of the population were ethnic russians, and the remaining  of the population were ethnic minorities; while over fourfifths of russias population was of european descentof whom the vast majority were slavs, with a substantial minority of finnic and germanic peoples. according to the united nations, russias immigrant population is the worlds thirdlargest, numbering over . million; most of which are from postsoviet states, mainly from central asia.

russian is the official and the predominantly spoken language in russia. it is the most spoken native language in europe, the most geographically widespread language of eurasia, as well as the worlds most widely spoken slavic language. russian is one of two official languages aboard the international space station, as well as one of the six official languages of the united nations.russia is a multilingual nation; approximately  minority languages are spoken across the country. according to the russian census of , . million across the country spoke russian, . million spoke tatar, and . million spoke ukrainian. the constitution gives the countrys individual republics the right to establish their own state languages in addition to russian, as well as guarantee its citizens the right to preserve their native language and to create conditions for its study and development. however, various experts have claimed russias linguistic diversity is rapidly declining due to many languages becoming endangered.

russia is a secular state by constitution, and its largest religion is eastern orthodox christianity, chiefly represented by the russian orthodox church. orthodox christianity, together with islam, buddhism, and paganism , are recognised by russian law as the traditional religions of the country, part of its historical heritage.islam is the secondlargest religion in russia, and is the traditional religion among the majority of the peoples of the north caucasus, and among some turkic peoples scattered along the volgaural region. large populations of buddhists are found in kalmykia, buryatia, zabaykalsky krai, and they are the vast majority of the population in tuva. many russians practise other religions, including rodnovery , assianism , other ethnic paganisms, and interpagan movements such as ringing cedars anastasianism, various movements of hinduism, siberian shamanism and tengrism, various neotheosophical movements such as roerichism, and other faiths. some religious minorities have faced oppression and some have been banned in the country; notably, in  the jehovahs witnesses were outlawed in russia, facing persecution ever since, after having been declared an extremist and nontraditional faith.in , the research organisation sreda, in cooperation with the ministry of justice, published the arena atlas, an adjunct to the  census, enumerating in detail the religious populations and nationalities of russia, based on a largesample countrywide survey. the results showed that . of russians declared themselves christiansincluding  russian orthodox, . simply orthodox or members of nonrussian orthodox churches, . unaffiliated christians, and less than  old believers, catholics or protestants were believers without affiliation to any specific religion,  were atheists, . were muslims, . were followers of traditional religions honouring gods and ancestors , . were buddhists, . were religious jews and . were hindus.

russia has an adult literacy rate of , and has compulsory education for a duration of  years, exclusively for children aged  to . it grants free education to its citizens by constitution. the ministry of education of russia is responsible for primary and secondary education, as well as vocational education; while the ministry of education and science of russia is responsible for science and higher education. regional authorities regulate education within their jurisdictions within the prevailing framework of federal laws. russia is among the worlds most educated countries, and has the sixthhighest proportion of tertiarylevel graduates in terms of percentage of population, at .. it spent roughly . of its gdp on education in .russias preschool education system is highly developed and optional, some fourfifths of children aged  to  attend day nurseries or kindergartens. primary school is compulsory for eleven years, starting from age  to , and leads to a basic general education certificate. an additional two or three years of schooling are required for the secondarylevel certificate, and some seveneighths of russians continue their education past this level.admission to an institute of higher education is selective and highly competitive firstdegree courses usually take five years. the oldest and largest universities in russia are moscow state university and saint petersburg state university. there are ten highly prestigious federal universities across the country. russia was the worlds fifthleading destination for international students in , hosting roughly  thousand.

russia, by constitution, guarantees free, universal health care for all russian citizens, through a compulsory state health insurance program. the ministry of health of the russian federation oversees the russian public healthcare system, and the sector employs more than two million people. federal regions also have their own departments of health that oversee local administration. a separate private health insurance plan is needed to access private healthcare in russia.russia spent . of its gdp on healthcare in . its healthcare expenditure is notably lower than other developed nations. russia has one of the worlds most femalebiased sex ratios, with . males to every female, due to its high male mortality rate. in , the overall life expectancy in russia at birth was . years , and it had a very low infant mortality rate .the principal cause of death in russia are cardiovascular diseases. obesity is a prevalent health issue in russia; most adults are overweight or obese. however, russias historically high alcohol consumption rate is the biggest health issue in the country, as it remains one of the worlds highest, despite a stark decrease in the last decade. smoking is another health issue in the country.  the countrys high suicide rate, although on the decline, remains a significant social issue.

russian writers and philosophers have played an important role in the development of european literature and thought. the russians have also greatly influenced classical music, ballet, sport, painting, and cinema. the nation has also made pioneering contributions to science and technology and space exploration.russia is home to  unesco world heritage sites,  out of which are cultural; while  more sites lie on the tentative list. the large global russian diaspora has also played a major role in spreading russian culture throughout the world. russias national symbol, the doubleheaded eagle, dates back to the tsardom period, and is featured in its coat of arms and heraldry. the russian bear and mother russia are often used as national personifications of the country. matryoshka dolls are considered a cultural icon of russia.

russia has eightpublic, patriotic, and religiousofficial holidays. the year starts with new years day on  january, soon followed by russian orthodox christmas on  january; the two are the countrys most popular holidays. defender of the fatherland day, dedicated to men, is celebrated on  february. international womens day on  march, gained momentum in russia during the soviet era. the annual celebration of women has become so popular, especially among russian men, that moscows flower vendors often see profits of  times  more than other holidays. spring and labour day, originally a soviet era holiday dedicated to workers, is celebrated on  may.victory day, which honours soviet victory over nazi germany and the end of world war ii in europe, is celebrated on  may as an annual large parade in moscows red square; and marks the famous immortal regiment civil event. other patriotic holidays include russia day on  june, celebrated to commemorate russias declaration of sovereignty from the collapsing soviet union; and unity day on  november, commemorating the  uprising which marked the end of the polish occupation of moscow.there are many popular nonpublic holidays. old new year is celebrated on  january. maslenitsa is an ancient and popular east slavic folk holiday. cosmonautics day on  april, in tribute to the first human trip into space. two major christian holidays are easter and trinity sunday.

early russian painting is represented in icons and vibrant frescos. in the early thcentury, the master icon painter andrei rublev created some of russias most treasured religious art. the russian academy of arts, which was established in , to train russian artists, brought western techniques of secular painting to russia. in the th century, academicians ivan argunov, dmitry levitzky, vladimir borovikovsky became influential. the early th century saw many prominent paintings by karl briullov and alexander ivanov, both of whom were known for romantic historical canvases. ivan aivazovsky, another romantic painter, is considered one of the greatest masters of marine art.in the s, a group of critical realists , led by ivan kramskoy, ilya repin and vasiliy perov broke with the academy, and portrayed the manysided aspects of social life in paintings. the turn of the th century saw the rise of symbolism; represented by mikhail vrubel and nicholas roerich. the russian avantgarde flourished from approximately  to ; and globally influential artists from this era were el lissitzky, kazimir malevich, natalia goncharova, wassily kandinsky, and marc chagall.the history of russian architecture begins with early woodcraft buildings of ancient slavs, and the church architecture of kievan rus. following the christianization of kievan rus, for several centuries it was influenced predominantly by byzantine architecture. aristotle fioravanti and other italian architects brought renaissance trends into russia. the thcentury saw the development of the unique tentlike churches; and the onion dome design, which is a distinctive feature of russian architecture. in the thcentury, the fiery style of ornamentation flourished in moscow and yaroslavl, gradually paving the way for the naryshkin baroque of the s.after the reforms of peter the great, russias architecture became influenced by western european styles. the thcentury taste for rococo architecture led to the splendid works of bartolomeo rastrelli and his followers. the most influential russian architects of the eighteenth century; vasily bazhenov, matvey kazakov, and ivan starov, created lasting monuments in moscow and saint petersburg and established a base for the more russian forms that followed. during the reign of catherine the great, saint petersburg was transformed into an outdoor museum of neoclassical architecture. under alexander i, empire style became the de facto architectural style. the second half of the thcentury was dominated by the neobyzantine and russian revival style. in early thcentury, russian neoclassical revival became a trend. prevalent styles of the late thcentury were art nouveau, constructivism, and socialist classicism.

until the thcentury, music in russia consisted mainly of church music and folk songs and dances. in the thcentury, it was defined by the tension between classical composer mikhail glinka along with other members of the mighty handful, who were later succeeded by the belyayev circle, and the russian musical society led by composers anton and nikolay rubinstein. the later tradition of pyotr ilyich tchaikovsky, one of the greatest composers of the romantic era, was continued into the th century by sergei rachmaninoff. worldrenowned composers of the th century include alexander scriabin, alexander glazunov, igor stravinsky, sergei prokofiev and dmitri shostakovich, and later edison denisov, sofia gubaidulina, georgy sviridov, and alfred schnittke.during the soviet era, popular music also produced a number of renowned figures, such as the two balladeersvladimir vysotsky and bulat okudzhava, and performers such as alla pugacheva. jazz, even with sanctions from soviet authorities, flourished and evolved into one of the countrys most popular musical forms. by the s, rock music became popular across russia, and produced bands such as aria, aquarium, ddt, and kino; the latters leader viktor tsoi, was in particular, a gigantic figure. pop music has continued to flourish in russia since the s, with globally famous acts such as t.a.t.u.

russian literature is considered to be among the worlds most influential and developed. it can be traced to the middle ages, when epics and chronicles in old east slavic were composed. by the age of enlightenment, literature had grown in importance, with works from mikhail lomonosov, denis fonvizin, gavrila derzhavin, and nikolay karamzin. from the early s, during the golden age of russian poetry, literature underwent an astounding golden age in poetry, prose and drama. romanticism permitted a flowering of poetic talent vasily zhukovsky and later his protg alexander pushkin came to the fore. following pushkins footsteps, a new generation of poets were born, including mikhail lermontov, nikolay nekrasov, aleksey konstantinovich tolstoy, fyodor tyutchev and afanasy fet.the first great russian novelist was nikolai gogol. then came ivan turgenev, who mastered both short stories and novels. fyodor dostoevsky and leo tolstoy soon became internationally renowned. mikhail saltykovshchedrin wrote prose satire, while nikolai leskov is best remembered for his shorter fiction. in the second half of the century anton chekhov excelled in short stories and became a leading dramatist. other important thcentury developments included the fabulist ivan krylov, nonfiction writers such as the critic vissarion belinsky, and playwrights such as aleksandr griboyedov and aleksandr ostrovsky. the beginning of the th century ranks as the silver age of russian poetry. this era had poets such as alexander blok, anna akhmatova, boris pasternak, and konstantin balmont. it also produced some firstrate novelists and shortstory writers, such as aleksandr kuprin, nobel prize winner ivan bunin, leonid andreyev, yevgeny zamyatin, dmitry merezhkovsky and andrei bely.after the russian revolution of , russian literature split into soviet and white migr parts. in the s, socialist realism became the predominant trend in russia. its leading figure was maxim gorky, who laid the foundations of this style. mikhail bulgakov was one of the leading writers of the soviet era. nikolay ostrovskys novel how the steel was tempered has been among the most successful works of russian literature. influential migr writers include vladimir nabokov, and isaac asimov; who was considered one of the big three science fiction writers. some writers dared to oppose soviet ideology, such as nobel prizewinning novelist aleksandr solzhenitsyn, who wrote about life in the gulag camps.russian philosophy has been greatly influential. alexander herzen is known as one of the fathers of agrarian populism. mikhail bakunin is referred to as the father of anarchism. peter kropotkin was the most important theorist of anarchocommunism. mikhail bakhtins writings have significantly inspired scholars. helena blavatsky gained international following as the leading theoretician of theosophy, and cofounded the theosophical society. vladimir lenin, a major revolutionary, developed a variant of communism known as leninism. leon trotsky, on the other hand, founded trotskyism. alexander zinoviev was a prominent philosopher in the second half of the th century. aleksandr dugin, known for his fascist views, has been regarded as the guru of geopolitics.

russian cuisine has been formed by climate, cultural and religious traditions, and the vast geography of the nation; and it shares similarities with the cuisines of its neighbouring countries. crops of rye, wheat, barley, and millet provide the ingredients for various breads, pancakes and cereals, as well as for many drinks. bread, of many varieties, is very popular across russia. flavourful soups and stews include shchi, borsch, ukha, solyanka, and okroshka. smetana  and mayonnaise are often added to soups and salads. pirozhki, blini, and syrniki are native types of pancakes. beef stroganoff, chicken kiev, pelmeni, and shashlyk are popular meat dishes. other meat dishes include stuffed cabbage rolls  usually filled with meat. salads include olivier salad, vinegret, and dressed herring.russias national nonalcoholic drink is kvass, and the national alcoholic drink is vodka; its production in russia  dates back to the th century. the country has the worlds highest vodka consumption, while beer is the most popular alcoholic beverage. wine has become increasingly popular in russia in the st century. tea has been popular in russia for centuries.

there are  news agencies in russia, among which the largest internationally operating are tass, ria novosti, sputnik, and interfax. television is the most popular medium in russia. among the , licensed radio stations nationwide, notable ones include radio rossii, vesti fm, echo of moscow, radio mayak, and russkoye radio. of the , registered newspapers, argumenty i fakty, komsomolskaya pravda, rossiyskaya gazeta, izvestia, and moskovskij komsomolets are popular. staterun channel one and russia are the leading news channels, while rt is the flagship of russias international media operations. russia has the largest video gaming market in europe, with over  million players nationwide.russian and later soviet cinema was a hotbed of invention, resulting in worldrenowned films such as the battleship potemkin, which was named the greatest film of all time at the brussels worlds fair in . sovietera filmmakers, most notably sergei eisenstein and andrei tarkovsky, would go on to become among of the worlds most innovative and influential directors. eisenstein was a student of lev kuleshov, who developed the groundbreaking soviet montage theory of film editing at the worlds first film school, the allunion institute of cinematography. dziga vertovs kinoeye theory had a huge impact on the development of documentary filmmaking and cinema realism. many soviet socialist realism films were artistically successful, including chapaev, the cranes are flying, and ballad of a soldier.the s and s saw a greater variety of artistic styles in soviet cinema. the comedies of eldar ryazanov and leonid gaidai of that time were immensely popular, with many of the catchphrases still in use today. in  sergey bondarchuk directed an oscarwinning film adaptation of leo tolstoys epic war and peace, which was the most expensive film made in the soviet union. in , vladimir motyls white sun of the desert was released, a very popular film in a genre of ostern; the film is traditionally watched by cosmonauts before any trip into space. after the dissolution of the soviet union, the russian cinema industry suffered large losseshowever, since the late s, it has seen growth once again, and continues to expand.

football is the most popular sport in russia. the soviet union national football team became the first european champions by winning euro , and reached the finals of euro . russian clubs cska moscow and zenit saint petersburg won the uefa cup in  and . the russian national football team reached the semifinals of euro . russia was the host nation for the  fifa confederations cup, and the  fifa world cup. however, russian teams are currently suspended from fifa and uefa competitions.ice hockey is very popular in russia, and the soviet national ice hockey team dominated the sport internationally throughout its existence. bandy is russias national sport, and it has historically been the highestachieving country in the sport. the russian national basketball team won the eurobasket , and the russian basketball club pbc cska moscow is among the most successful european basketball teams. the annual formula one russian grand prix was held at the sochi autodrom in the sochi olympic park, until its termination following the russian invasion of ukraine in .historically, russian athletes have been one of the most successful contenders in the olympic games. russia is the leading nation in rhythmic gymnastics; and russian synchronised swimming is considered to be the worlds best. figure skating is another popular sport in russia, especially pair skating and ice dancing. russia has produced numerous prominent tennis players. chess is also a widely popular pastime in the nation, with many of the worlds top chess players being russian for decades. the  summer olympic games were held in moscow, and the  winter olympics and the  winter paralympics were hosted in sochi. however, russia has also had  olympic medals stripped from its athletes due to doping violations, which is the most of any country, and nearly a third of the global total.

due to the covid pandemic, a number of nonpharmaceutical interventions colloquially known as lockdowns  have been implemented in numerous countries and territories around the world. these restrictions were established with the intention to reduce the spread of sarscov, the virus that causes covid. by april , about half of the worlds population was under some form of lockdown, with more than . billion people in more than  countries or territories having been asked or ordered to stay at home by their governments. although similar disease control measures have been used for hundreds of years, the scale of those implemented in the s is thought to be unprecedented.research and case studies have shown that lockdowns were generally effective at reducing the spread of covid, therefore flattening the curve. the world health organizations recommendation on lockdowns is that they should be very brief, shortterm measures to reorganize, regroup, rebalance resources, and protect health workers who are exhausted. to achieve a balance between restrictions and normal life, the who recommends a response to the pandemic that consists of strict personal hygiene, effective contact tracing, and isolating when ill.in addition to the health effects of  lockdown restrictions, researchers have found the lockdowns have reduced crime and violence by armed nonstate actors, such as the islamic state, and other terrorist groups.  they have also had profound negative economic impacts, and have been met with protests in some territories.

several researchers, from modeling and demonstrated examples, have concluded that lockdowns were somewhat effective at reducing the spread of, and deaths caused by, covid. lockdowns are thought to be most effective at containing or preventing covid community transmission, healthcare costs and deaths when implemented earlier, with greater stringency, and when not lifted too early.a study investigating the spread based on studies of the most common symptoms such as loss of taste and smell in france, italy and the uk showed a marked decrease in new symptoms just a few days after the start of confinement on the countries  with the strongest lockdowns. modelling on the united states pandemic suggested the pandemic would have been almost completely suppressed from significantly taking off if the lockdown measures were implemented two weeks earlier and that the second wave would have been less severe had the lockdown lasted another two weeks.the stringent lockdown in hubei in early  proved effective at controlling the covid outbreak in china. the relatively high number of cases and deaths in sweden, which has kept much of its society open during the pandemic, when compared to its neighbours with comparable demographics norway, denmark and finland that did enforce lockdowns, is thought to be at least partly attributable to this difference in policy. similarly, modelling on australian data concluded that achieving zero community transmission through a strict lockdown lowers healthcare and economic costs compared to less stringent measures that allow transmission to continue, and warned that early relaxation of restrictions have greater costs. this zero community transmission approach was adopted in australia, and a strict four month lockdown in the state of victoria during an outbreak in melbourne, combined with other measures, averted a wider outbreak in the country in . new zealand and vietnam also adopted a zerocovid strategy throughout  that included targeted lockdowns.the emergence of the highly transmissible sarscov delta variant in  has led some commentators to suggest that although lockdowns continue to reduce the spread of covid, they have become less effective at containing it. lockdowns in australia and vietnam in response to delta outbreaks proved less effective at containment than previous lockdowns were against the spread of other variants.

one study led by an economist at the university of chicago found that involuntary lockdowns had little impact, with voluntary distancing making up nearly  of the fall in consumer traffic as people feared the virus itself. similarly, a national bureau of economic research study found stayathome orders increased staying at home by just . another study from yale university found that most social distancing was voluntary, driven primarily by media coverage of morbidity and mortality.on the other hand, some studies have argued that coercive measures probably decreased interactions, while accepting that most of the reduction may have been voluntary. one of those two studies, by flaxman et al., has been criticized, among other things for having a countryspecific adjustment factor, without which the model would predict a massive number of deaths for sweden. one widely cited economic simulation asserting that shelterinplace orders reduced total cases threefold, however, held voluntary distancing constant. another study found a  difference among bordercounties where stayathome orders were imposed.another study that compared the impact of less restrictive interventions on the spread of covid in sweden and south korea, with mandatory stayat home orders in  other countries, such as france and spain, did not find evidence for greater disease control in the countries with more restrictions. however, the findings of the study have been questioned due to its numerous limitations, including the small sample size of countries.some research has also found that an advisory approach is not adequate to control covid outbreaks. an analysis of an outbreak in northern italy found that an effective reduction in community transmission occurred during a strict national lockdown, and that earlier less stringent measures were ineffective at reducing mobility to a level low enough to reduce the spread of covid.since the beginning of the pandemic, google has consistently collected data on movements, showing rapid declines in public activity long before legal restrictions were imposed. an april  poll found that  of americans voluntarily chose to only leave home when necessary, regardless of legal restrictions.

a february  review of  articles concluded there was acknowledgement of the importance of nonpharmaceutical interventions in controlling the spread of covid. however, later research also acknowledges high societal costs, though in some circumstances less than the costs of allowing the pandemic to spread without mitigation.

epidemiological evidence supports generalized nonpharmaceutical interventions to curb the spread of covid.during the early stages of the pandemic in europe and the united states, statistical modeling which advised that restrictions were helpful to prevent a large number of deaths were used as the basis for lockdowns. this includes an imperial college projection, led by epidemiologist neil ferguson. despite some criticisms, academics defended the imperial projection as fundamentally sound, while admitting the code was a buggy mess. retrospective evaluation of lockdowns and computer modeling has verified that they have significantly contributed to reducing mortality and morbidity from covid.a notable opponent of lockdowns has included swedens state epidemiologist anders tegnell, who has frequently criticised the strategy. the swedish governments approach has included minimal restrictions and has been controversial in part due to the relatively high death toll due to widespread transmission. however, the swedish government began considering enacting a lockdown in early .while arguing in august  for the need for further lockdowns in the united states, physicians ranu dhillon and abraar karan argued for smarter lockdowns that impose restrictions on areas with high levels of transmission, and to increase support to vulnerable populations in these locations to offset the economic costs.a number of medical experts signed the great barrington declaration in october  which called for focused protection on high risk groups and minimal restrictions on the general population to achieve herd immunity through covid infection. however, the majority of medical experts and the who have strongly criticised this proposed strategy for its lack of scientific basis and for being unethical. the declaration has also attracted controversy over its funding and the authenticity of its signatures.

some commentators have suggested that states use of emergency powers to curb freedom of assembly and movement are authoritarian and may result in longterm democratic backsliding. centralization of power by political leadership in hungary, poland, china and cambodia in response to the covid pandemic have been cited as examples.some researchers have noted that covid pandemic restrictions have come with mental health costs, compounded by those caused by the covid pandemic itself.due to their closure, educational institutions worldwide transitioned to online learning. teachers and faculty had to learn new ways to engage with students while in a covid pandemic. examples of online teaching tools are podcasts, videos, and virtual classrooms.un women warned in an april  report that covid pandemic restrictions exacerbate gender inequalities and have led to an increase in domestic violence. many women were being forced to lockdown at home with their abusers at the same time that services to support survivors are being disrupted or made inaccessible. for instance, in france there was around a  spike in cases of since the lockdown in march .

some economists supported increased government funding for mitigation efforts, even at the cost of tolerating a very large economic contraction. they agreed that lockdowns should continue until the threat of resurgence has declined, even when considering only the economic impact. there was a general agreement, at least in some economic circles, that severe lockdowns  including closing nonessential businesses and strict limitations on peoples movement  are likely to be better for the economy in the medium term than less aggressive measures.

both the world food programme  and the world health organization  have published statements noting the impact of the lockdowns on livelihoods and food security, and david nabarro, who special envoy on covid stated in october  that lockdowns just have one consequence that you must never ever belittle, and that is making poor people an awful lot poorer.

there have also been a number of protests worldwide in opposition to lockdowns, including in the united kingdom, the united states, australia, germany, the netherlands, canada and new zealand. the motivations for and sizes of these protests have varied. some have been spurred by the economic and social impacts of lockdowns, but have also been associated with misinformation related to the pandemic, conspiracy theories and antivaccination.

in the table pandemic lockdowns are defined as the shutdown of parts of the economy, due to nonpharmaceutical antipandemic measures and are enforceable by law like

closing of schools and kindergartens

closing of nonessential shops 

closing of nonessential production

cancellation of recreational venues and closing of public places

curfews

stayathome orders and total movement controlthese measures are considered to have caused the covid recession in .

the table does not contain

measures with smaller economic impacts like

border closures

social distancing measures and social movement restrictions

travel restrictions.

other nonpharmaceutical antipandemic measures like mandatory quarantines after travel, self quarantine and social distancing measures

any measures which are voluntary rather than enforceable by lawthe pandemic has resulted in the largest number of shutdowns/lockdowns worldwide at the same time in history.

by  march, . billion people worldwide were under some form of lockdown, which increased to . billion people by the first week of april  more than half of the worlds population. lockdowns affect  of workers worldwide.  live in nations with complete workplace closures, save for critical businesses, and  in countries with partial closures. nearly  live in nations with recommended but not compulsory workplace shutdown.major restrictions first began in china, with other countries in east asia like vietnam soon following it in implementing widespread containment measures. much of europe, north america and africa took much longer to bring in tough measures. lockdowns between and within nations are of varying stringency.by mid april, nearly  million people, or about  per cent of the population, were under some form of lockdown in the united states, with around  million in the philippines and about  million in south africa, while around . billion were under lockdown in india, which was the largest of all lockdowns.by the end of april, around  million people were under lockdown in various countries of europe, including but not limited to italy, spain, france, and the united kingdom; while around  million people were under lockdown in latin america. in germany,  of workers did work from home in addition to their regular onsite duties, while  did so exclusively.

leonardo wilhelm dicaprio  is an american actor and film producer. known for his work in biographical and period films, he is the recipient of numerous accolades, including an academy award, a british academy film award and three golden globe awards. as of , his films have grossed over . billion worldwide, and he has been placed eight times in annual rankings of the worlds highestpaid actors.

born in los angeles, dicaprio began his career in the late s by appearing in television commercials. in the early s, he had recurring roles in various television shows, such as the sitcom parenthood, and had his first major film part as author tobias wolff in this boys life . he received critical acclaim and his first academy award and golden globe award nominations for his performance as a developmentally disabled boy in whats eating gilbert grape . dicaprio achieved international stardom with the starcrossed romances romeo  juliet  and titanic . after the latter became the highestgrossing film at the time, he reduced his workload for a few years. in an attempt to shed his image of a romantic hero, dicaprio sought roles in other genres, including the  crime dramas catch me if you can and gangs of new york; the latter marked the first of his many successful collaborations with director martin scorsese.

dicaprio continued to gain acclaim for his performances in the biopic the aviator , the political thriller blood diamond , the crime drama the departed  and the romantic drama revolutionary road . he later made environmental documentaries and starred in several highprofile directors successful projects, including the action thriller inception , the western django unchained , the biopic the wolf of wall street , the survival drama the revenant for which he won the academy award for best actor the comedydramas once upon a time in hollywood  and dont look up , and the western crime drama killers of the flower moon .

dicaprio is the founder of appian way productionsa production company that has made some of his films and the documentary series greensburg and the leonardo dicaprio foundation, a nonprofit organization devoted to promoting environmental awareness. a united nations messenger of peace, he regularly supports charitable causes. in , he was named a commander of the ordre des arts et des lettres for his contributions to the arts, and in , he appeared in time magazines  most influential people in the world. dicaprio was voted one of the  greatest actors of all time in a  readers poll by empire.

leonardo wilhelm dicaprio was born on november , , in los angeles, california. he is the only child of irmelin indenbirken, a legal secretary, and george dicaprio, an underground comix artist and distributor; they met while attending college and moved to los angeles after graduating. his mother is german and his father is of italian and german descent. his maternal grandfather, wilhelm indenbirken, was german, and his maternal grandmother, helene indenbirken, was a russian immigrant living in germany. dicaprio was raised catholic. sources have falsely claimed his maternal grandmother was born in odesa, ukraine; there is no evidence that dicaprio has any relatives of ukrainian birth or heritage.dicaprios parents named him leonardo because his pregnant mother first felt him kick while she was looking at a leonardo da vinci painting in the uffizi museum in florence, italy. when dicaprio was one year old, his parents divorced after his father fell in love with another woman, prompting him to move out. to raise him together, his parents moved into twin cottages with a shared garden in echo park, los angeles. dicaprios father lived with his girlfriend and her son, adam farrar, with whom dicaprio developed a close bond. dicaprio and his mother later moved to other neighborhoods, such as los feliz. he has described his parents as bohemian in every sense of the word and as the people i trust the most in the world. dicaprio has stated that he grew up poor in a neighborhood plagued with prostitution, crime and violence. attending the los angeles center for enriched studies for four years and later the seeds elementary school, he later enrolled at the john marshall high school. dicaprio disliked public school and wanted to audition for acting jobs instead. he dropped out of high school later, eventually earning a general equivalency diploma.as a child, dicaprio wanted to become either a marine biologist or an actor. he eventually favored the latter; he liked impersonating characters and imitating people, and enjoyed seeing their reactions to his acting. his interest in performing began at the age of two when he went onto the stage at a performance festival and danced spontaneously to a positive response from the crowd. he was also motivated to learn acting when farrars appearance in a television commercial earned him ,. dicaprio has said in interviews that his first television appearance was in the childrens series romper room, and that he was dismissed from the show for being disruptive. the shows host has denied that any children were removed from the show in this way. at , he began appearing in several commercials for matchbox cars, which he calls his first role. dicaprio later appeared in commercials for kraft singles, bubble yum and apple jacks. in , he played the role of glen in two episodes of the television show the new lassie.at the beginning of his career, dicaprio had difficulty finding an agent. when he found one, the agent suggested dicaprio change his name to lenny williams to appeal to american audiences, which he declined to do. dicaprio remained jobless for a year and a half, even after  auditions. following this lack of success, dicaprio was going to give up acting but his father persuaded him to persevere. motivated by his father and by the prospect of financial security, he continued to audition. after a talent agent, who knew his mothers friend, recommended him to casting directors, dicaprio secured roles in about  commercials.by the early s, dicaprio began acting regularly on television, starting with a role in the pilot of the outsiders  and one episode of the soap opera santa barbara , in which he played a teenage alcoholic. dicaprios career prospects improved when he was cast in parenthood, a series based on the  comedy film of the same name. to prepare for the role of garry buckman, a troubled teenager, he analyzed joaquin phoenixs performance in the original film. his work that year earned him two nominations at the th youth in film awardsbest young actor in a daytime series for santa barbara and best young actor starring in a new television series for parenthood. around this time, he was a contestant on the childrens game show fun house, on which he performed several stunts, including catching the fish inside a small pool using only his teeth.

dicaprio made his film debut later that year as the stepson of an unscrupulous landlord in the lowbudget horror sequel critters   a part he later described as your average, nodepth, standard kid with blond hair. dicaprio has stated that he prefers not to remember critters , viewing it as possibly one of the worst films of all time and the kind of role he wanted to avoid in the future. later in , he became a recurring cast member on the sitcom growing pains, playing luke brower, a homeless boy who is taken in by the shows central family. costar joanna kerns recalls dicaprio being especially intelligent and disarming for his age but she noted that he was also mischievous and jocular on set, and often made fun of his costars. dicaprio was cast by the producers to appeal to young female audience, but his arrival did not improve the shows ratings and he left before the end of its run. he was nominated for a young artist award for best young actor costarring in a television series. dicaprio also had an uncredited role in  in one episode of roseanne.

in , dicaprio had a brief role in the first installment of the poison ivy film series, and was handpicked by robert de niro from a shortlist of  young actors to costar with him in this boys life. adapted from the memoir by tobias wolff, the film focuses on the relationship between a rebellious teenager, toby  , and his mother  and abusive stepfather . director michael catonjones said that dicaprio did not know how to behave on set; accordingly, catonjones used a strict mentoring style, after which dicaprios behavior began to improve. bilge ebiri of rolling stone found that the powerful bond between barkin and dicaprio elevated the film, praising dicaprios portrayal of his characters complex growth from a rebellious teen to an independent young man. this boys life was the first film that gained him recognition.dicaprio played the developmentally disabled brother of johnny depps character in whats eating gilbert grape , a comedydrama about a dysfunctional iowa family. catonjones recommended dicaprio to director lasse hallstrm, but he was initially skeptical, as he considered dicaprio too goodlooking for the part. hallstrm cast dicaprio after he emerged as the most observant auditionee. to ensure authenticity in his portrayal, dicaprio studied similarly impaired children and their mannerisms, and hallstrm allowed him to create the character using his own researched attributes. the film became a critical success. at , dicaprio earned a national board of review award, as well as nominations for a golden globe award and an academy award for best supporting actor, making him the seventhyoungest oscar nominee in the category. the films real showstopping turn comes from mr. dicaprio, wrote new york times critic janet maslin, who makes arnies many tics so startling and vivid that at first he is difficult to watch. the performance has a sharp, desperate intensity from beginning to end. caryn james, also writing for the new york times, said of his performances in this boys life and whats eating gilbert grape he made the raw, emotional neediness of those boys completely natural and powerful.dicaprios first role of  was in sam raimis western the quick and the dead. when sony pictures became dubious over dicaprios casting, costar sharon stone paid his salary herself. the film was released to dismal box office performance and mixed reviews from critics. dicaprio next starred as a teenage jim carroll, a drugaddicted high school basketball player and budding writer, in the biopic the basketball diaries. he starred in the erotic drama total eclipse , driven by the desire to showcase an exceptional performance, which would focus on his acting talent rather than his muchdiscussed physical appeal. directed by agnieszka holland, it is a fictionalized account of the samesex relationship between arthur rimbaud  and paul verlaine . dicaprio was cast when river phoenix died before filming began. although the film failed commercially, it has been included in the catalog of the warner archive collection, which releases classic and cult films from warner bros. library on home video. a review in the san francisco chronicle called dicaprio his generations great acting promise but criticized the mismatch between thewliss cultivated british accent and dicaprios southern california twang.dicaprio next starred opposite claire danes in baz luhrmanns romeo  juliet , an abridged modernization of william shakespeares romantic tragedy, which retained the original shakespearean dialogue. dicaprio was initially unsure about another romeo and juliet adaptation, but at his fathers suggestion, he agreed to examine luhrmanns work more closely. dicaprio and luhrmann then spent a twoweek workshop exchanging ideas, which led to the collaboration. romeo  juliet established dicaprio as a leading hollywood actor; according to film scholar murray pomerance, dicaprios newfound popularity helped the film become profitable only days after its release. reviewing dicaprios early works, david thomson of the guardian called dicaprio a revelation in whats eating gilbert grape, very moving in this boys life, suitably desperate in the basketball diaries and a vital spark in romeo  juliet. the latter earned dicaprio a silver bear for best actor at the  berlin international film festival. he then portrayed a young man who has been committed to a mental asylum in marvins room , a family drama about two estranged sisters, played by meryl streep and diane keaton, who are reunited through tragedy. he played hank, the troubled son of streeps character. lisa schwarzbaum of entertainment weekly praised the deeply gifted dicaprio for holding his own against veteran actresses keaton and streep, describing the three as fullbodied and so powerfully affecting that youre carried along on the pleasure of being in the presence of their extraordinary talent.

dicaprio rejected a role in boogie nights  to star opposite kate winslet in james camerons titanic as members of different social classes who fall in love aboard rms titanic during its illfated maiden voyage. dicaprio initially had doubts, but was eventually encouraged by cameron to pursue the part. with a production budget of more than  million, including dicaprios  million salary, the film was the most expensive in history at the time, and was shot at rosarito, baja california where a replica of the ship was created. titanic became the highestgrossing film at the time, eventually earning more than . billion in boxoffice receipts worldwide. the role of jack dawson transformed dicaprio into a superstar, resulting in intense adoration among teenage girls and young women that became known as leomania. the film won  academy awardsthe most wins for any film  including best picture, but dicaprios failure to gain a nomination led to a protest against the academy of motion picture arts and sciences  by more than  fans. he was nominated for other highprofile awards, including a golden globe award for best actor.

dicaprio stated in  i have no connection with me during that whole titanic phenomenon and what my face became around the world ... ill never reach that state of popularity again, and i dont expect to ... its not something im going to try to achieve either. in his  rolling stone article, ebiri called the role dicaprios best, writing that he and winslet infuse their earnest backandforth with so much genuine emotion that its hard not to get swept up in their doomed love affair. a writer for vanity fair in  similarly labeled them hollywoods most iconic screen couple since humphrey bogart and ingrid bergman. essaying her first viewing of the film in , vox contributor alissa wilkinson took note of dicaprios boyish charm and found his performance natural and unaffected. the success of titanic intensified dicaprios standing as a teen idol and romantic lead, an image from which he sought to dissociate himself. he reduced his workload to learn to hear his own voice in choosing the roles that he wanted to pursue.dicaprio had a brief featured role in woody allens  satire of fame, celebrity. ebiri labeled dicaprio the best thing in the film. that year, he also took on the dual roles of villainous king louis xiv and his secret, sympathetic twin brother philippe in randall wallaces the man in the iron mask, with common elements from the  film of the same name and a  film with douglas fairbanks. it received mixed to negative reviews, but grossed  million against a budget of  million. entertainment weekly critic owen gleiberman wrote that dicaprio did not look old enough to play the part, but praised him as a fluid and instinctive actor, with the face of a mischievous angel. the guardians alex von tunzelmann was similarly impressed with the actors performance but found his talent wasted in the film. dicaprio won a golden raspberry award for worst screen couple for the dual roles in .also in , dicaprio was cast to star in american psycho  for a reported salary of  million; after disagreements with oliver stone on the films direction, dicaprio left the project, taking the lead role in the beach instead. adapted from alex garlands  novel, the film saw him play a backpacking american tourist who ends up in a secret island commune in the gulf of thailand. budgeted at  million, the film earned almost three times that at the box office, but was negatively reviewed by critics, and earned him a nomination for the golden raspberry award for worst actor. todd mccarthy of variety thought dicaprio gave a compelling performance but his character lacked defining qualities. the film received criticism for damaging the filming location in thailand, after which dicaprio worked to restore the area.in the mids, dicaprio agreed to be in the mostly improvised blackandwhite short film dons plum as a favor to aspiring director r. d. robb. when robb expanded it to a fulllength film, dicaprio and costar tobey maguire had its release blocked in the us and canada by court order, arguing they never intended to make a feature film. the film premiered at the  berlin international film festival but remains obscure.

dicaprio turned down the role of anakin skywalker in star wars episode ii  attack of the clones , feeling unprepared to take that dive at the time. his first film that year was the biopic catch me if you can, based on the life of frank abagnale jr., who before his th birthday committed check fraud to make millions in the s. directed by steven spielberg, the film was shot across  different locations in  days, making it the most adventurous, supercharged moviemaking dicaprio had experienced yet. the film received critical acclaim and grossed  million against a budget of  million, becoming his second highestgrossing release after titanic. roger ebert praised his departure from dark and troubled characters, and two entertainment weekly critics in  called it dicaprios best role, labeling him delightfully persuasive, deceptive, flirtatious, and sometimes tragicand we dare you to find a better role, if you can. dicaprio received his third golden globe nomination for his performance in the film.also in , dicaprio starred in martin scorseses gangs of new york, a historical drama set in the midth century in the five points district of new york city. scorsese initially struggled selling his idea of realizing the film until dicaprio became interested in starring in the film, and thus miramax films got involved with financing the project. nonetheless, production on the film was plagued by overshooting of budgets and producerdirector disagreements, resulting in an eightmonth shoot. with a budget of  million, the film was the most expensive scorsese had ever made. dicaprio was drawn to playing amsterdam vallon, the young leader of an irishamerican street gang, as it marked a shift from boyish roles to a mature leading man. gangs of new york earned  million worldwide and received positive critical response. anne thompson of the observer took note of dicaprios lowkey, sturdy performance, but felt that costar daniel daylewis overshadowed him.in , dicaprio founded the production company appian way productions, a namesake of the italian road. he was interested in finding unique source material and preserving its essence during development, citing previous experiences where the involvement of too many people influenced the final product in a negative way. dicaprio first executiveproduced the assassination of richard nixon, which starred sean penn as samuel byck, and was screened at the  cannes film festival. dicaprio and scorsese reunited for a biopic of howard hughes, an american film director and aviation pioneer suffering from obsessivecompulsive disorder, in the aviator , which dicaprio also coproduced under appian way. he initially developed the project with michael mann who was eventually replaced by scorsese. the aviator became a critical and financial success, grossing  million against its budget of  million. simond braund of empire thought dicaprio convincingly played a complex role and highlighted the scenes depicting hughess paranoia and obsession. he received his first golden globe award for best actor  motion picture drama and nominations for an academy award, a bafta award and a screen actors guild award.in , dicaprio starred in the crime film the departed and the political war thriller blood diamond. in scorseses the departed, dicaprio played the role of billy costigan, a state trooper working undercover in the irish mob in boston, someone he characterizes as being in a constant hour panic attack. dicaprio especially liked the experience of working with costar jack nicholson, describing a scene with him as one of the most memorable moments of his life as an actor. in preparation, he visited boston to interact with people associated with the irish mob and gained  pounds  of muscle. critically acclaimed, the film grossed  million against a budget of  million, becoming dicaprio and scorseses highestgrossing collaboration to that point. peter travers of rolling stone praised dicaprios and costar matt damons performances as explosive, emotionally complex, but felt that nicholson overshadowed the two. despite dicaprios leading role in the departed, the films distributor warner bros. pictures submitted his performance for a best supporting actor nomination at the ampas to avoid internal conflict with his part in blood diamond. instead, his costar mark wahlberg was nominated, though dicaprio earned other accolades for the departed, including a satellite award for best supporting actor and best actor nominations at the golden globes and bafta awards.

in blood diamond, dicaprio starred as a diamond smuggler from rhodesia who is involved in the sierra leone civil war. while filming, he worked with  orphaned children from the sos childrens village in maputo, mozambique, and said he was touched by his interactions with them. to prepare, he spent six months in africa, learned about camouflage from people in south african military and interviewed and recorded people in the country to improve his accent. the film received generally favorable reviews, and dicaprio was noted for his south african accent, which is generally known as difficult to imitate. claudia puig of the usa today approvingly highlighted dicaprios transition from a boy to a man on screen, and ann hornaday of the washington post similarly noted his growth as an actor since the departed. dicaprio received nominations for an academy award and a golden globe for blood diamond.in , dicaprio produced the comedy drama gardener of eden, which according to the hollywood reporters frank scheck lacked the necessary dramatic urgency or black humor to connect with audiences. later that year, he produced, cowrote and narrated the th hour, a documentary on the state of the natural environment that won the earthwatch environmental film award in . dicaprios appian way produced planet greens greensburg , which ran for three seasons. set in greensburg, kansas, it is about rebuilding the town in a sustainable way after being hit by the may  ef tornado. also in , dicaprio starred in body of lies, a spy film based on the novel of the same name. he played one of three agents battling a terrorist organization in the middle east. considering the film to be a throwback to political features of the s like the parallax view  and three days of the condor , dicaprio dyed his hair brown and wore brown contacts for the role. the film received mixed reviews from critics, and grossed  million against a budget of . million.later in , dicaprio collaborated with kate winslet for the drama revolutionary road, directed by her thenhusband sam mendes. as both actors had been reluctant to make romantic films similar to titanic, it was winslet who suggested that they both work with her on a film adaptation of the  eponymous novel by richard yates. she found that the script, by justin haythe, had little in common with the  blockbuster. playing a couple in a failing marriage in the s, dicaprio and winslet spent some time together in preparation, and dicaprio felt claustrophobic on the small set they used. he saw his character as unheroic, slightly cowardly and someone willing to be just a product of his environment. peter travers liked dicaprios pairing with winslet and his multilayered portrayal of an overwhelmed character, and marshall sella of gq called it the most mature and memorable performance of his lifetime. dicaprio earned his seventh golden globes nomination for the film. revolutionary road grossed . million against its budget of  million. he ended the s by producing director jaume colletserras psychological horror thriller film orphan , starring vera farmiga, peter sarsgaard and isabelle fuhrman. although the film received mixed reviews, it was a commercial success.

dicaprio continued to collaborate with scorsese in the  psychological thriller film shutter island, based on the  novel of the same name by dennis lehane. he played edward teddy daniels, a u.s. marshal investigating a psychiatric facility located on an island, who comes to question his own sanity. dicaprio and scorsese became interested in the project in , and the former coproduced the film under appian way with phoenix pictures. because of the films disturbing scenes, dicaprio had nightmares of mass murder during production and considered relaxing with his friends a form of therapy. the film was released to mixed reviews; peter bradshaw of the guardian praised scorseses direction and the acting but criticized its twist ending. peter travers called it dicaprios most haunting and emotionally complex performance yet, and particularly liked his cave scene with costar patricia clarkson. the film was a commercial success, grossing  million worldwide against a budget of  million.

dicaprios second role in  was in christopher nolans critically acclaimed ensemble sciencefiction film inception. inspired by the experience of lucid dreaming and dream incubation, the film features dom cobb , an extractor who enters the dreams of others to obtain information that is otherwise inaccessible. cobb is promised a chance to regain his old life in exchange for planting an idea in a corporate targets mind. dicaprio was fascinated with the idea of a dreamheist and the potential for his character to manipulate his dreamworld and impact his real life. made on a budget of  million, the film grossed  million worldwide to become dicaprios second highestgrossing film. to star in this film, dicaprio agreed to a pay cut from his  million fee and opted for a share in firstdollar gross points, which entitled him to a percentage of the cinema ticket sales. the risk proved fruitful, as dicaprio earned  million from the film, becoming his highest payday yet.dicaprio starred as j. edgar hoover in clint eastwoods j. edgar . a biopic about hoover, the film focuses on his career as an fbi director, including an examination of his private life as an alleged closeted homosexual. critics felt that the film lacked coherence overall but commended dicaprios performance. roger ebert praised dicaprios ability to bring depth and nuance to the character, suggesting that his performance conveyed aspects of hoovers personality that were possibly even unknown to the man himself. also in , he produced catherine hardwickes romantic horror film red riding hood. though it was named one of the ten worst films of  by time magazine, it had moderate boxoffice returns. also that year, dicaprios appian way produced george clooneys political drama the ides of march, an adaptation of beau willimons  play farragut north.in , dicaprio starred as plantation owner calvin candie in quentin tarantinos spaghetti western, django unchained. after reading the script, dicaprio felt uncomfortable with the extent of racism portrayed in the film, but his costars and tarantino convinced him not to sugarcoat it. while filming, dicaprio accidentally cut his hand on glass, but continued filming, and tarantino elected to use the take in the final product. the film received critical acclaim; a writer for wired magazine commended him for playing a villainous role and found his performance bloodchilling. the film earned dicaprio a golden globe award nomination for best supporting actor. django unchained grossed  million worldwide on a production budget of  million.in january , dicaprio said he would take a long break from acting to fly around the world doing good for the environment. that year, he had four releases as an actor and a producer. his first was in the role of millionaire jay gatsby in baz luhrmanns the great gatsby, an adaptation of f. scott fitzgeralds  novel of the same name, costarring carey mulligan and tobey maguire. the film received mixed reviews from critics, but dicaprios performance was praised and earned him the aacta award for best actor in a leading role. critic rafer guzman of newsday wrote that dicaprio was not only tough ... but also vulnerable, touching, funny, a faker, a human. its a tremendous, hardwon performance. matt zoller seitz of roger eberts website described his performance as the movies greatest and simplest special effect, and iconicmaybe his career best. the film grossed  million worldwide, more than three times its budget. three films were produced by dicaprio under appian way in the ensemble crime thriller runner runner, which the guardians xan brooks described as a lazy, trashy film that barely goes through the motions; the commercially failed thriller out of the furnace; and the black comedydrama the wolf of wall street.dicaprio reunited with scorsese for the fifth time in the wolf of the wall street, a film based on the life of stockbroker jordan belfort , who was arrested in the late s for securities fraud and money laundering. dicaprio wanted to play belfort ever since he had read his autobiography and won a bidding war with warner bros. against brad pitt and paramount pictures for the rights to belforts memoir in . he was fond of belforts honest and unapologetic portrayal of his actual experiences in the book, and was inspired by the financial crisis of  to make the film. the wolf of wall street received positive reviews for scorseses and dicaprios work together. the hollywood reporters todd mccarthy lauded dicaprio for fully realizing his characters potential with a carefree performance. jonathan romney of film comment wrote that dicaprio displays a great deal of comedic talent, excelling in rubberlimbed slapstick humor. the film earned him the golden globe award for best actor  motion picture musical or comedy and nominations for a bafta award for best actor in a leading role, as well as academy awards for best actor and best picture.

dicaprio was an executive producer on virunga, a  british documentary film about four people fighting to protect the worlds last mountain gorillas from war and poaching. the film premiered at the tribeca film festival in april , and dicaprio was nominated for the  primetime emmy award for outstanding documentary or nonfiction special. cowspiracy the sustainability secret was another documentary film that year for which he was an executive producerhe took part in the new cut released exclusively on netflix that september. it explores the impact of animal agriculture on the environment.

in , dicaprio produced and played fur trapper hugh glass in alejandro g. irritus survival drama the revenant. dicaprio found his role in the film difficult; he had to eat a raw slab of bisons liver and sleep in animal carcasses. he also learned to shoot a musket, build a fire, speak two native american languages  and apply ancient healing techniques. built on a budget of  million, the film earned  million worldwide. the film received positive reviews with particular praise for dicaprios acting. mark kermode of the guardian wrote that dicaprio shone with a performance that prioritizes physicality over speech, and nick de semlyen of empire noted that he uplifted the film. the film earned him numerous awards, including an academy award, a golden globe, a bafta, a screen actors guild award and a critics choice award for best actor. for the next three years, dicaprio narrated documentaries and served as a producer for films. in , he was an executive producer for the ivory game and catching the sun; he also produced, hosted and narrated the documentary before the flood about climate change. he produced the crime drama live by night , which received unenthusiastic reviews and failed to recoup its  million production budget. his next production ventures were in the psychological horror delirium and the commercially failed actionadventure robin hood.after producing and narrating the  global warming documentary ice on fire, dicaprio returned to acting following a fouryear break in quentin tarantinos comedydrama once upon a time in hollywood, which traces the relationship between rick dalton , an aging television actor and his stuntman, cliff booth . to help the films financing, dicaprio and pitt agreed to take a pay cut, and they each received  million. dicaprio liked working with pitt, and tarantino described the pair as the most exciting since robert redford and paul newman. dicaprio was fascinated with the films homage to hollywood and focus on the friendship between his and pitts characters. he drew from reallife experience of witnessing the struggles and rejections of his actor friends in the industry. the film premiered at the  cannes film festival, where critics praised his and pitts performances. a writer for business insider called it one of the best performances of dicaprios career, and ian sandwell of digital spy particularly liked the duos chemistry, believing their scenes together to be some of the films strongest parts. dicaprio received nominations for an oscar, a golden globe, a bafta award and a screen actors guild award for best actor. the film earned  million against a budget of  million.in , dicaprio served as an executive producer for the right stuff, a television series adaption of the  namesake book. after being in development at national geographic, it was released on disney. that may, dicaprio briefly featured in the finale of the miniseries the last dance. in , dicaprio appeared in adam mckays satirical comedy dont look up. he spent five months changing the films script with mckay before agreeing to the part. starring alongside jennifer lawrence as two astronomers attempting to warn humanity about an extinctionlevel comet, dicaprio saw this film as an analogy of the worlds indifference to the climate crisis. as a frequent supporter of environmentalism, dicaprio said he has often looked to star in and make films tackling issues related to it, something he found hard due to peoples inability to listen. he praised mckay for envisioning a project on how humans would react to a serious issue from a political, social and scientific standpoint. while reviews for the film were mixed, most critics praised dicaprios and lawrences performances; journalists from digital spy and ndtv lauded their pairing. dicaprio earned nominations for a golden globe and a bafta award for the film. it broke the record for the most views  in a single week in netflix history.dicaprio next starred in scorseses crime drama killers of the flower moon  based on the book of the same name by david grann, for which he was paid  million. initially signed for the heroic part of fbi agent thomas bruce white sr., dicaprio insisted on playing the morally complex role of ernest burkhart, a nephew of murderer william king hale, leading to extensive script rewrites. declaring it the best performance of dicaprios career, indiewires david ehrlich wrote that his nuanced and uncompromising turn as the cretinous ernest burkhart mines new wonders from the actors longstanding lack of vanity.

early in his career, dicaprio gained a reputation for his reckless behavior and intense partying with a group of male celebrities dubbed the pussy posse in the s. in an infamous article published by new york magazine in , journalist nancy jo sales criticized the group as men whose pursuit was to chase girls, pick fights and not tip the waitress. during an unknown activity, dicaprio got himself and friend justin herwick almost killed when his parachute failed to open, after which his instructor released an emergency core. in response, dicaprio said he is fond of doing things that scare him. john mccain, who was a united states senator for arizona, called him an androgynous wimp. dicaprio found peoples perception of him exaggerated, adding, they want you miserable, just like them. they dont want heroes; what they want is to see you fall. steven spielberg, who directed him in catch me if you can, defended dicaprios reputation as a party boy, believing it is a common behavior for young people and describing him as a familyoriented person during the films production. considering dicaprio to be conscious of his public reputation, the new york times caryn james credited him as one of the few actors to use his stardom to further social causes. carole cadwalladr of the guardian said dicaprio is polite, charming, makes jokes, engages eye contact. and manages ... to give almost no hint whatsoever of his actual personality.

dicaprio is regarded as one of the finest actors of his generation. in a  readers poll by empire, he was voted one of the  greatest actors of all time. the magazine praised his willingness to go to the ends of the earth  to get under his characters skin. colin covert of the seattle times similarly believed dicaprio redefines film stardom through his willingness to take on challenging roles that few of his contemporaries are capable of performing.since his international stardom with titanic , he has admitted feeling nervous about starring in bigbudget studio films because of their hype and marketing campaigns. as an actor, he views film as a relevant art form, like a painting or sculpture. a hundred years from now, people will still be watching that movie. he often plays roles based on reallife people and stories told in specific periods. according to caryn james, dicaprio is unafraid of working with established directors on unconventional projects; taking such risks has led him to star in failed films like the beach , but also his successful collaborations with martin scorsese. dicaprio has described his relationship with scorsese as dreamlike and admires his knowledge of film, crediting the director with having taught him its history and importance. scorsese has commented on dicaprios ability to repeatedly demonstrate emotion on screen. jesse hassenger of the a.v. club considers the duos collaborationswhich earned them the  national board of review to be careerdefining moments for both of them and as vital as scorseses acclaimed collaborations with robert de niro.author michael k. hammond wrote that dicaprio built his star reputation by demonstrating his acting ability, and praised him for revealing a character while concealing the actor and disappearing into his roles. according to agnieszka holland, who directed dicaprio in total eclipse , dicaprio is one of the most mature actors she has worked with and is courageous in his choice of roles. holland remarked that he does not rely on method acting but rather on a trick that allows him to truly become the character. meryl streep, who costarred with dicaprio in marvins room, said he possesses the kind of unpredictability that makes his career difficult to classify, his life precarious and his work thrilling. writing for the observer, film critic philip french has asserted that many characters portrayed by dicaprio are in the process of becoming men. he wrote that dicaprios inclination toward films about dysfunctional families and characters seeking father figures may allude to his own troubled childhood. dicaprio often plays characters who themselves are playing roles, which caryn james says looks simple on screen but requires sophisticated acting. he tends to play antiheroes and characters who lose their mental stability as the narrative progresses. derek thompson of the atlantic argued that dicaprio gives his best performances when playing frauds and cheats and doublecrossing liars and mercenaries.several media publications, such as people, empire and harpers bazaar, have included dicaprio in their listings of the most attractive actors. in , he sued playgirl magazine over plans to publish a fully nude picture of him. he has said he does not believe in focusing on appearanceas this is only temporary and can negatively affect ones profession in the industryand looks for career longevity instead. in , dicaprio was made a commander of the ordre des arts et des lettres by the french minister of culture for his contributions to the arts. in , he was named one of the  most influential people in the world by time magazine. he was included on forbes annual list of the worlds highestpaid actors in  and from  to  with respective earnings of  million,  million,  million,  million,  million,  million,  million and  million, topping the list in . the magazine has commended dicaprios ability to star in risky, rrated films that become box office successes. the hollywood reporter listed him as one of the  most powerful people in entertainment from  to . a writer for the same magazine credits dicaprio as the rare actor to have a successful career without ever having made a comic book movie, family film or prebranded franchise. leo is the franchise. stacey wilson hunt, analyzing his career in new york magazine in , opined dicaprio, unlike most of his contemporaries, had not starred in a bad film in the previous ten years. of his success, dicaprio says, my attitude is the same as when i started. i feel very connected to that fifteenyearold kid who got his first movie.dicaprio has named robert de niro and james dean as two of his favorite and most influential actors, stating there were a lot of great actors i really fell in love with, but if i were to pick two, from different generations, it would be de niro and james dean. when asked about a performance that stayed with him the most, dicaprio responded, i remember being incredibly moved by jimmy dean, in east of eden. there was something so raw and powerful about that performance. his vulnerability ... his confusion about his entire history, his identity, his desperation to be loved. that performance just broke my heart.

an active celebrity in the climate change movement, dicaprio believes global warming is the worlds numberone environmental challenge. eager to learn about ecology from an early age, he would watch documentaries on rainforest depletion and the loss of species and habitats. in , he established the leonardo dicaprio foundation, a nonprofit organization devoted to promoting environmental awareness. it supports organizations and campaigns committed to ensuring a viable future for planet earth, and produced the short web documentaries water planet and global warning. the foundation has also funded debtfornature swaps. by , the foundation had funded more than  projects, providing  million in support. he has been an active supporter of numerous environmental organizations and sat on the board of the world wildlife fund and international fund for animal welfare.dicaprio has owned environmentfriendly electrichybrid vehicles. his use of private jets and large yachts have been criticized as hypocritical due to their large carbon footprints. dicaprio chaired the national earth day celebration in  where he interviewed bill clinton and they discussed plans to deal with global warming and the environment. he presented at the  american leg of live earth. dicaprio donated  million to the wildlife conservation society at russias tiger summit. dicaprios persistence in reaching the event after encountering two plane delays caused then prime minister vladimir putin to describe him as a muzhik or real man. in , he organized a benefit fine art auction, th hour, which raised nearly . million for his foundation. in september , united nations secretarygeneral ban kimoon designated dicaprio as a united nations messenger of peace with a focus on climate change. later that month, he made an opening statement to members of the un climate summit; his speech reached an estimated one billion people worldwide. in , he announced his intention to divest from fossil fuels. he again spoke at the un in april  prior to the signing of the paris climate change agreement.

at a  meeting with pope francis, dicaprio donated to charity and discussed environmental issues with him. a few days later, possibly influenced by this meeting, the pope said he would act in a charity film. dicaprio traveled to indonesia in early  where he criticized the governments palm oil industrys slashandburn forest clearing methods. in july , his foundation donated . million to help protect wildlife and the rights of native americans, along with mitigating climate change. that october, dicaprio joined mark ruffalo in support of the standing rock tribes opposition to the dakota access pipeline.in april , dicaprio protested against president donald trumps inaction on climate change by attending the peoples climate march. in july, a charity auction and celebrity concert arranged by dicaprios foundation had raised over  million in one night. the dicaprio foundation donated  million in december  to fight climate change. in may , dicaprio pledged  million to enact conservation operations across the galpagos islands.

dicaprio endorsed hillary clinton for the  presidential election. in march , dicaprio attended a fundraiser for joe biden at the home of paramount pictures executive sherry lansing. prior to the  election, dicaprio narrated a netflix documentary series about voting rights, stating, all of us may have been created equal. but well never actually be equal until we all vote. so dont wait. on social media, dicaprio urged voters to make a plan to cast their ballots and to draw attention to voter suppression and restrictive voter id laws, citing voteriders as a source of information and assistance.in , dicaprio testified during the trial against prakazrel michel, who is being accused of participating in a foreign influence campaign that was aimed at the obama and trump administrations.

in , dicaprio and his mother donated , for a leonardo dicaprio computer center at a library in los feliz. in may , dicaprio joined kate winslet, director james cameron and canadian singer celine dion, in a campaign to raise money to financially support the fees of the nursing home where millvina dean, a survivor of the rms titanic, was residing. dicaprio and winslet donated , to support dean. in , he donated  million to relief efforts in haiti after the earthquake. in , dicaprio joined the animal legal defense funds campaign to release tony, a tiger that had spent the last decade at a truck stop in grosse tte, louisiana. dicaprio donated , to the gay rights group glaad in .in , dicaprio donated , to the annual fundraising gala for the children of armenia fund, where he was a special guest of his friend and honorary chair, tony shafrazi. supporting hurricane harvey  relief efforts, dicaprio provided  million through his foundation. in , dicaprios foundation donated  million to australia bushfire relief efforts. amidst the  russian invasion of ukraine, the media announced dicaprio donated  million to support ukraine, although the news agency associated press suggested this amount was inaccurate.

dicaprio is agnostic but does not identify as an atheist. his personal life is the subject of widespread media attention. he rarely grants interviews and is reluctant to discuss his private life. dicaprio has been the focus of various reports detailing his involvement with women aged  or younger, and has faced criticism for those relationships. in , dicaprio met brazilian model gisele bndchen, whom he dated until . he was romantically involved with israeli model bar refaeli from  to . he later dated german fashion model toni garrn from  to  and later in . dicaprio was in a relationship with american model and actress camila morrone from c.  until .dicaprio owns houses in los angeles and apartments in new york city. in , he bought an island, blackadore caye, off mainland belizeon which he is set to open an environmentfriendly resortand in , he purchased the original dinah shore residence designed by architect donald wexler in palm springs, california.in , dicaprios face was severely injured when model aretha wilson hit him over the head with a broken bottle at a hollywood party. as a result, he required seventeen stitches to his face and neck. wilson pleaded guilty to the assault and was sentenced in  to two years in prison.in , when the wolf of wall street producer red granite pictures was involved in the malaysia development berhad scandal, dicaprio turned over the gifts he received from business associates at the production company, including from fugitive businessman jho low, to the us government. these included a best actor oscar trophy won by marlon brando, a . million pablo picasso painting and a  million jeanmichel basquiat collage.

according to the online portal box office mojo and the review aggregate site rotten tomatoes, dicaprios most critically and commercially successful films include whats eating gilbert grape , romeo  juliet , titanic , catch me if you can , gangs of new york , the aviator , the departed , blood diamond , shutter island , inception , django unchained , the great gatsby , the wolf of wall street , the revenant  and once upon a time in hollywood . his films have grossed . billion worldwide.dicaprio has been recognized by the academy of motion picture arts and sciences for the following performances

th academy awards  best supporting actor, nomination, for whats eating gilbert grape

th academy awards  best actor, nomination, for the aviator

th academy awards  best actor, nomination, for blood diamond

th academy awards  best picture and best actor, nominations, for the wolf of wall street

th academy awards  best actor, win, for the revenant

nd academy awards  best actor, nomination, for once upon a time in hollywooddicaprio has won three golden globe awards best actor  motion picture drama for the aviator and the revenant and best actor  motion picture musical or comedy for the wolf of wall street, as well as a bafta award and a screen actors guild award for best actor for the revenant.

kimberly noel kardashian  is an american media personality, socialite, and businesswoman. she first gained media attention as a friend and stylist of paris hilton, but received wider notice after the sex tape kim kardashian, superstar, which she filmed in  with her thenboyfriend ray j, was released in . later that year, she and her family began to appear on the e reality television series keeping up with the kardashians, which aired until . its success led to the formation of the spinoff series kourtney and kim take new york , kourtney and kim take miami , and hulus the kardashians .

kardashian has developed a significant presence online and across numerous social media platforms, including her hundreds of millions of followers on twitter and instagram. with sisters kourtney and khlo, she launched the fashion boutique chain dash, which operated from  to . kardashian founded kkw beauty and kkw fragrance in , and the shaping underwear or foundation garment company skims in . she has released a variety of products tied to her name, including the  mobile game kim kardashian hollywood and the  photo book selfish. her acting credits include the films disaster movie , temptation confessions of a marriage counselor , and paw patrol the movie , as well as the twelfth season of the anthology horror series american horror story .time magazine included kardashian on their list of s  most influential people. both critics and admirers have described her as exemplifying the notion of being famous for being famous. she is estimated to be worth us. billion, as of . kardashian has become more politically active by lobbying for prison reform and clemency, and is currently under a fouryear law apprenticeship supervised by the legal nonprofit cut. her relationship with rapper kanye west has also received significant media coverage; the two of them were married from  to  and have four children together.

kimberly noel kardashian was born on october , , in los angeles, california, to robert and kris kardashian . she has an older sister, kourtney, a younger sister, khlo, and a younger brother, rob. their mother is of scottish and dutch ancestry, while their father was a thirdgeneration armenianamerican. in , their parents divorced and their mother married bruce jenner, the  summer olympics decathlon winner. as a result of her mothers remarriage, kim kardashian acquired stepbrothers burton burt, brandon, and brody; a stepsister, casey; and later two halfsisters, kendall and kylie jenner.kardashian attended marymount high school, a roman catholic allgirls school in los angeles. in , her father represented football player o. j. simpson during his murder trial. simpson is kardashians godfather. kardashians father died in  of cancer. in her teenage years, kardashian was a close friend of nicole richie and paris hilton, through whom she first garnered media attention. after totaling her car at age , her father agreed to buy her a new one on condition that she agree to be responsible for paying all expenses related to any future damages. she subsequently began working at body, a local clothing store in encino, california, where she worked for four years, assisting in the opening of the calabasas location. in , after entering into her first marriage, she resigned.

by , kardashian was working as a personal stylist to the rb singer and actress, brandy, the sister of ray j. later, the siblings mother  sonja norwood, alleged that in  she had authorized kardashian to make one and only one purchase on her american express credit card and that nevertheless kardashian and her sisters khlo and kourtney had incurred over , in unauthorized charges to that card. norwood also alleged that the bulk of the charges were attributable to purchases made at kardashians familyowned boutique in  and , after kardashian was no longer employed by norwoods daughter. norwood further alleged that, at the request of her children, she did not file criminal charges, instead presenting her allegations personally to kardashian, and that kardashian apologized and promised to repay the debt. in , no payments having been forthcoming, norwood filed a lawsuit. kardashian has denied all these allegations. in , the parties reportedly reached a confidential settlement, and the lawsuit was dismissed.in , kardashian had begun working as a stylist for paris hilton, a childhood friend of hers. she appeared in several episodes of the reality series the simple life and was frequently photographed accompanying hilton to events and parties. sheeraz hasan, a pr strategist working with hilton, had previously met kardashian and her mother kris jenner in , and stated in a  / television special that kardashian was ready to do whatever it takes to create a successful brand. rick mendozza, a freelance photographer on assignment for the tabloid tmz, remarked in the same interview that, when kardashian accompanied hilton to hyde, which was a hollywood hotspot at the time, he continued to get assignments from tabloids to get photographs of kardashian for the next three years. in , kardashian said that hilton literally gave me a career. and i totally acknowledge that.

in february , a sex tape made by kardashian and singer ray j in  was leaked on the internet and gained national attention. kardashian filed a lawsuit against vivid entertainment for distributing the film as kim kardashian, superstar. she dropped the suit  months later and settled for a reported us million, giving vivid permission to market and sell copies of the tape. sales from the film reportedly generated nearly us. million in revenue in the first six weeks. several media outlets later criticized her and her family for using the sex tapes release as a publicity stunt to promote their forthcoming reality show. in october , a few months later, kardashian and her mother, kris jenner, her stepparent caitlyn jenner , her siblings kourtney, khlo, and rob kardashian, and halfsisters kendall and kylie jenner, began to appear in the reality television series keeping up with the kardashians. the series proved successful for e, and led to the creation of a number of spinoffs, including kourtney and kim take new york and kourtney and kim take miami. the flagship series concluded in june  after  episodes.kardashian posed in a nude pictorial for the december  issue of playboy, and appeared on the cover of the november  issue of romanian playboy, promoting a pictorial titled poezia unui fund bombat . she made her feature film debut, opposite carmen electra, in the disaster film spoof disaster movie , in which she appeared as a character named lisa. in , she was a participant on season seven of dancing with the stars, where she was partnered with mark ballas. she was the third contestant to be eliminated. in september , fusion beauty and seven bar foundation launched kiss away poverty, with kardashian as the face of the campaign. for each lipfusion lipgloss sold, us went to the foundation to fund women entrepreneurs in the united states. in october, she launched her first fragrance, selftitled kim kardashian. that year, she also released a workout dvd series, became a guest hostjudge of wrestlemania xxiv on americas next top model, and gueststarred in how i met your mother, beyond the break, and cbss csi ny.

by , kardashian had ventured into several new endorsement deals, including endorsing various food products for carls jr. on july , , the new york city branch of madame tussauds revealed a wax figure of kardashian. kim, kourtney, and khlo wrote an autobiography titled kardashian konfidential, which was released in stores on november , , and appeared on new york timess best seller list. in december , she filmed a music video for a song titled jam . the video was directed by hype williams; kanye west makes a cameo in the video. kardashian premiered the song during a new years eve party at tao las vegas on december , . the song was produced by thedream and tricky stewart. when asked if an album was in the works, kardashian replied, theres no album in the works or anythingjust one song we did for kourtney and kim take new york, and a video hype williams directed, half of the proceeds were giving away to a cancer foundation, because thedreams and one of my parents passed away from cancer. its just all having funwith a good cause. jim farber, writing for the daily news, called the song a deadbrained piece of generic dance music, without a single distinguishing feature, and suggested that the single made kardashian the worst singer in the reality tv universe.in , kardashian also served as producer for the spin crowd, a reality television show about a new york city public relations firm run by jonathan cheban and simon huck, appeared on season ten of the apprentice, and guest starred with khlo and kourtney as themselves on the season three premiere episode of the series .

in , kardashian released her third fragrance, gold, as well as a novel, dollhouse, along with sisters kourtney and khloe. in , e renewed keeping up with the kardashians for two additional seasons, in a deal reported to be worth  million. that year, kardashian released her fourth fragrance, true reflection, which she worked with the company dress for success to promote, and her fifth fragrance, glam, which was made available through debenhams. in temptation confessions of a marriage counselor , a romantic drama produced, written, and directed by tyler perry, kardashian obtained the role of the coworker of an ambitious therapist. while the film was a moderate box office success, with a worldwide gross of us. million, critical response was negative and kardashian won the razzie award for worst supporting actress.

kardashian released kim kardashian hollywood, a mobile game for iphone and android, in june . the objective of the game is to become a hollywood star or starlet. the game supports a free to play model, meaning the game is free to download, but charges for ingame items. it was a hit, earning us. million in its first five days of release. in july, developer glu mobile announced that the game was the fifth highest earning game in apples app store. she voiced an alien in the september , , episode of the adult animated series american dad.kardashian appeared on the cover and in a pictorial in papers winter  issue, photographed by jeanpaul goude. on the cover, her nude buttocks are featured above the caption break the internet, which generated considerable comment in both social and traditional media. a time magazine writer commented that, unlike previous celebrities nudes that represented the womens rebellion against repressed society and trying to tear down barriers, kardashians exhibition was just provocation and bluster, repeated images that seem to offer us some sort of truth or insight but are really just self serving. we want there to be something more, some reason or context, some great explanation that tells us what it is like to live in this very day and age, but there is not. kim kardashians ass is nothing but an empty promise. however, the stunt set a new benchmark in social media response, and papers website received . million views in one day, compared with , views on an average day.kardashian released a portfolio book called selfish, a page collection of selftaken photos of herself, in may . it received positive reviews from critics, with kat brown of the telegraph describing it as unexpectedly revealing and oddly moving. that year, she was also the cover model for the august issue of vogue spain, and released an emoji pack for ios devices called kimoji. the app was a bestseller, becoming one of the top  most bought apps in its first week of release.by november , as per cbc marketplace and interviews with celebrity endorsement experts, kardashian was reportedly paid at least us, for each post that she made on instagram, facebook and twitter, endorsing beauty products like waist trainers, teeth whiteners as well as cocacola and wellknown charities. business insider later estimated her fee to be around us, per instagram post. even though engagement data indicates that her posts are worth slightly less, her regular features in the news allows her to demand a premium above any calculated instagram sponsored post price.

with sisters kourtney and khlo, she launched the fashion boutique chain dash with an initial store in calabasas, california. the chain operated between  and .in , kardashian launched both her beauty and fragrance lines, kkw beauty and kkw fragrance.kardashian and laverne cox coexecutive produced the lifetime reality competition series, glam masters, which premiered in february . the eightepisode series featured a number of aspiring beauty bloggers compete in tasks for the title of glam master; the winner receives the opportunity to collaborate with kardashian on a makeup line for kkw beauty and join her glam squad. kardashian and the series winner, argenis pinal teamed up on eyeshadow sticks for kkw beauty, named crme color sticks. she made a cameo appearance in the heist film oceans , which was released on june , . kardashians next project was the hidden cameraprank reality series, you kiddin me. coexecutive produced by kardashian and lionsgate television, the series premiered on facebook watch in september . she appeared alongside her sisters and their mother kris jenner in the series premiere episode. in november, kardashian and kris appeared in the nbc special, a legendary christmas with john and chrissy.in may , kardashian appeared in the music video for dj duo dimitri vegas  like mike and paris hiltons single, b.f.a. . after announcing a new range of shapewear called kimono in june, kardashian was heavily criticized over the name of the brand, which critics argued disrespected japanese culture and ignored the significance behind the traditional outfit. following the launch of the range, the hashtag kimohno began trending on twitter and the mayor of kyoto wrote to kardashian to ask her to reconsider the trademark on kimono. in response to public pressure, she announced that she would change the name. however, japanese trade minister hiroshige seko stated that he would still be dispatching patent officials for a meeting at the u.s. patent and trademark office, and that japan would keep an eye on the situation. in august , she rebranded the shapewear company to the name skims, officially launching the following month on its own web store and later made available on various other retailers such as ssense, david jones, netaporter, and ounass.in february , skims entered its first retail partnership with luxury store chain nordstrom. the company has also expanded into lingerie, bodysuits, loungewear, dresses, winter wear, and unisex clothing. since , skims has opened various popup stores in the united states, europe and asia. in june , the brand entered a partnership with the us olympics team to provide team usabranded athleisure to the teams female athletes at the  summer olympics and paralympics. skims clothing was also worn by athletes at the  winter olympics, following a capsule collection release in collaboration with the us winter olympics delegation. in november , skims and luxury fashion house fendi released a collaborative range of shapewear, leather dresses, and bodysuits. for her work on skims, kardashian was honored with the brand innovator award at the  wsj. innovator awards, and the innovation award at the  cfda  awards. in july , it was reported that her company stood at a valuation of us billion. skims made it to times list of  most influential companies of .on april , , the documentary kim kardashian west the justice project premiered on oxygen, starring and executive produced by kardashian. it follows her journey advocating for criminal justice reform and highlights mass incarceration in the us. in september, she made a cameo appearance in the youtube originals documentary, this is paris. in december , it was announced that kim, the kardashianjenner sisters, and their mother kris jenner had signed a multiyear exclusive global content deal with disneyowned hulu. a reality television series titled the kardashians premiered in april , coproduced by the sisters and kris with british production company fulwell . described as a premium version of keeping up with the kardashians, the program had the mostwatched series premiere for hulu in its first three days in the us, and was the mostwatched star originals series on disney and star across global markets. it was renewed up to a sixth season.kardashian appeared in the van jonesled documentary, the first step, which focuses on criminal justice reform; it premiered at the tribeca film festival in june . in july and august, she appeared in the premiere episodes of martha stewarts reality series, martha gets down and dirty; and paris hiltons cooking show cooking with paris, on discovery and netflix. kardashian voiced delores, a poodle, in the canadian animated film paw patrol the movie, released on august , . courtney howard of variety stated that kardashian and the supporting cast handled the films sillier moments. she reprised her voice role in the films sequel, paw patrol the mighty movie, released on september , . in october , kardashian hosted saturday night live and in her monologue, she made fun of her estrangedhusband kanye west, her mothers exhusband caitlyn jenner, her sisters, o. j. simpson, and many others.in january , in a classaction lawsuit filed against the cryptocurrency company ethereummax that alleged the company is a pump and dump scheme, kardashian was named as a defendant, along with former professional boxer floyd mayweather jr., former nba player paul pierce, and other celebrities, for promoting the ethereummax token on their various social media accounts. in october , the u.s. securities and exchange commission announced that kardashian had agreed to pay a . million fine, to not promote cryptocurrency assets for three years, and to cooperate with an ongoing investigation without admitting or denying wrongdoing for failing to report receiving a , payment to promote the ethereummax token. in december , central california u.s. district court judge michael w. fitzgerald dismissed the lawsuit on the basis that the claims were insufficiently supported given heightened pleading standards for fraud.in april , kardashian founded skky partners, a private equity firm, with a former partner of the carlyle group. her mother, kris jenner, is also a partner at the firm. in july , she made her paris fashion week modeling debut on the catwalk for fashion house balenciaga, along with nicole kidman, dua lipa, and christine quinn . the following month, kardashian and beats electronics launched a collaborative range of true wireless earbuds in an earth tone palette inspired by her signature minimalist style. under an exclusive deal with spotify, she hosted and coproduced the eightepisode podcast the system the case of kevin keith with podcast network parcast. premiering in october , it outlines the discrepancies of keiths case, in which he was convicted of triple homicide in  in ohio.in , kardashian collaborated with dolce  gabbana to curate their spring/summer  collection. the collection of mainly black, white, beige and silver pieces was shown on the runway at milan fashion week.in july , kardashian released an energy drink called kimade with nutritional supplement company, alani nu.kardashian coled the twelfth season of american horror story, subtitled delicate, alongside emma roberts. her first scripted television role, she starred as siobhan corbyn, the protagonists best friend and publicist. the season is based on danielle valentines novel delicate condition; its first part premiered in september  on fx. production for the season temporarily halted due to the hollywood writers strike.

in , at the age of , kardashian eloped with music producer damon thomas. thomas filed for divorce in . kardashian later blamed their separation on physical and emotional abuse on his part and said she was high on ecstasy during their wedding ceremony. before her divorce was finalized, kardashian began dating singer ray j.kardashian then dated reggie bush. their relationship began after matt leinart introduced them at the  espy awards. they split on july ,  and got back together on september , . 

kardashian also briefly dated nfl player miles austin in .in may , kardashian became engaged to nba player kris humphries, then of the new jersey nets, whom she had been dating since october . they were married in a wedding ceremony on august  in montecito, california. earlier that month, she had released her wedding fragrance called kim kardashian love which coincided with her own wedding. a twopart tv special showing the preparations and the wedding itself aired on e in early october , amidst what the washington post called a media blitz related to the wedding. after  days of marriage, she filed for divorce from humphries on october , citing irreconcilable differences. several news outlets surmised that kardashians marriage to humphries was merely a publicity stunt to promote the kardashian familys brand and their subsequent television ventures. a man professing to be her former publicist, jonathan jaxson, also claimed that her shortlived marriage was indeed staged and a ploy to generate money. kardashian filed a suit against jaxson, saying his claims were untrue, and later settled the case that included an apology from jaxson. a widely circulated petition asking to remove all kardashianrelated programming from the air followed the split. the divorce was subject to widespread media attention.kardashian began dating rapper and longtime friend kanye west in april , while still legally married to humphries. her divorce was finalized on june , , kardashian and west became engaged on october , kardashians rd birthday, and married on may , , at forte di belvedere in florence, italy. her wedding dress was designed by riccardo tisci of givenchy with some guests dresses designed by designer michael costello. the couples high status and respective careers have resulted in their relationship becoming subject to heavy media coverage; the new york times referred to their marriage as a historic blizzard of celebrity. west said kardashian was his muse.in january , cnn reported that the couple were discussing divorce and on february , , kardashian officially filed for divorce. in april , they both agreed before court that they would end their marriage due to irreconcilable differences and agreed to joint custody of their four children. they also agreed that neither of them need spousal support. in february , kardashian filed a complaint to the los angeles superior court, asking for a quicker proceedings in the divorce from west, saying that west was trying to delay it and saying that mr. west, by his actions, has made it clear that he does not accept that the parties marital relationship is over. kardashian was declared legally single on march , . this allowed her to drop west as her legal last name and ended their marriage. a divorce settlement was reached on november , .

kardashian was in a relationship with actor and comedian pete davidson from november  to august .

kim kardashian is a christian and has described herself as really religious. she was educated in christian schools of both the presbyterian and roman catholic traditions. in october , she was baptized in an armenian apostolic ceremony at the baptistery in the etchmiadzin cathedral complex and given the armenian name heghine .in april , kardashian and west traveled to the armenian quarter of the old city in jerusalem to have their daughter baptized in the armenian apostolic church, one of the oldest denominations of oriental orthodox christianity. the ceremony took place at the cathedral of st. james. khlo kardashian was appointed as the godmother. in october , kim baptized her three younger children at the baptistery in the etchmiadzin cathedral complex, armenias mother church.

kardashian and west have four children two daughters  and two sons .kardashian has publicly discussed difficulties during her first two pregnancies. she experienced preeclampsia during her first, which forced her to deliver at  weeks. with both pregnancies, she developed placenta accreta after delivery, eventually undergoing surgery to remove the placenta and scar tissue. after her second pregnancy, doctors advised her not to become pregnant again; her third and fourth children were born via surrogacy.kardashian has also spoken about her psoriasis. in may , it was reported that kardashian had tested positive for covid in november . she confirmed this report but denied reports that she caught the disease after hosting a party at a private island.

in may , kardashian was estimated to be worth us million. in , forbes reported she had made more this year than ever as her earnings nearly doubled to  million from s  million, and reported that she has monetized fame better than any other. much of her income includes wholesale earnings of the sears line, the kardashian kollection, which brought in  million in  and the kardashian beauty cosmetics line, kardashianbranded tanning products, the boutiqueline dash, as well as sponsored social media posts which are collectively worth ,, per post. as of july , kardashian was worth us million. kardashian does not receive alimony payments from either of her first two marriages. on april , , forbes estimated kardashians net worth at us billion.

on october , , while attending paris fashion week, kardashian was robbed at gunpoint in the apartment where she was staying. five individuals, dressed as police officers, bound and gagged her, then stole  million worth of jewelry. the thieves got in her residence by threatening the concierge. once they accessed kardashians room, they held a gun to her head, tying her wrists and legs and wrapping duct tape around her mouth as a gag. kardashian, who was placed in the bathtub, was physically unharmed and reportedly begged for her life. she managed to wriggle her hands free from the plastic ties around her wrists and scream for help. the thieves escaped. on october , , it was revealed that filming for the next season of keeping up with the kardashians had been placed on hold indefinitely after the robbery.after the robbery was announced, several critics expressed skepticism about whether it was staged or not, with some even drawing comparison to olympic swimmer ryan lochtes recent false robbery claim. on october , , a video was released showing kardashian immediately after the robbery, as police began conducting their investigation. in the video, she is seen using the cell phone that she had reported stolen, and did not have any of the markings she claimed from being bound by her captors, prompting more questions as to whether or not the events were staged. in response, kardashian filed lawsuits against several media outlets the following day, and secured a gag order to get the video removed from any articles due to it being part of an active police investigation. on october , , kardashian dropped the lawsuit, prompting more criticism that the robbery was a ploy to generate media attention. production resumed on keeping up with the kardashians on october .on january , , french police detained  persons of interest for questioning in the robbery case. later in ,  people were arrested for their alleged involvement. it was revealed in  that french prosecutors would seek trial for  of the suspects. the suspects who allegedly entered her room were of, or near, senior age and were named the grandpa robbers by the press. in , the suspects were still awaiting trial with at least one of the five who entered kardashians room reportedly set to plead no contest to the charges.

during an interview with caity weaver of gq for the july  issue, kardashian described herself as a democrat, and declared her support for hillary clinton in the  u.s. presidential election.in january , she tweeted a table of statistics that went viral, highlighting statistics that show that gun violence in the united states kills , people annually while terrorism in the united states kills  people annually. in december , the tweet was mentioned by the royal statistical society in the announcement of its international statistic of the year for . on a trip to uganda in october , she and her husband met with president yoweri museveni. they had a press conference, and kanye talked about tourism in uganda. they were criticized for meeting museveni due to his being a dictator and his recent crackdown on the opposition and the ugandan lgbt community.in april , vogue reported that kardashian was studying to pass the bar exam; instead of attending law school, she is reading law. in , kardashian said she had failed her firstyear law exam  for a second time, performing slightly worse than her first attempt earlier in the year. in december , she passed the baby bar law exam on her fourth attempt.in , kardashian condemned the actions of azerbaijan in the  nagornokarabakh conflict, and expressed her support for armenia and the republic of artsakh. on november , , it was reported that kardashian and the english soccer club leeds united f.c., with the help of rabbi moshe margertten of the tzedek association, had financially helped female afghan soccer players to make their way safely to england. the women and girls had escaped afghanistan following the taliban takeover, but were stranded in pakistan.

kardashian has expressed pride in her armenian and scottish ancestry. she is not a citizen of either armenia or the united kingdom, and does not speak armenian. she has advocated for the recognition of the armenian genocide on numerous occasions and encouraged president barack obama and the united states government to consider its acknowledgement. in april , kardashian wrote an article on her website condemning the wall street journal for running an advertisement by factcheckarmenia.com denying the armenian genocide. in april , kardashian wrote a letter to president joe biden thanking him for officially recognizing the armenian genocide and becoming the first united states president ever to do so.in april , kardashian traveled to armenia with her husband, her sister khlo, and her eldest daughter and visited the armenian genocide memorial tsitsernakaberd in yerevan. on october , , kardashian announced she donated  million to armenia fund, a humanitarian organization that supports armenias development.

kardashian has worked in the area of prison reform, advocating for the commutation of the sentence of chris young and also of alice marie johnson, a woman who received a life sentence for a firsttime drug offense as the leader of a major cocaine ring in tennessee which was granted by president donald trump in june . along with van jones and jared kushner, she was instrumental in persuading president trump to support the first step act, which enacted major reforms in the us prison system. van jones later stated that without kardashian, the act would have never passed because it would not have received the presidents support. it was later passed by a great majority in the us senate.

in , kardashian largely funded the  days to freedom campaign, an initiative to release nonviolent drug offenders from life sentences by attorneys brittany k. barnett and miangel cody. the effort resulted in  persons being released under provisions of the first step act. kardashian was widely credited for the success of the campaign in media headlines. commentary on her involvement ranged from praise, to assertions that it was a public relations stunt, to accusations that she was taking the credit for work she did not do. in a facebook post from may  of that year, barnett commented on the divisive and underfunded nature of the criminal justice reform space, adding, kim linked arms with us to support us when foundations turned us down. we and our clients and their families have a lot of love for her and are deeply grateful for her.in april , kardashian advocated for the clemency of melissa lucio, the only woman of hispanic descent on texas death row, in a series of tweets. she tweeted, i recently just read about the case of melissa lucio and wanted to share her story with you. she has been on death row for over  years for her daughters death that was a tragic accident. lucio is on death row for the abuse and death of her daughter, who was two years old. kardashian deleted the series of tweets the same day. when lucio was granted a stay of execution on april , kardashian celebrated on her social media channels.in july , kardashian expressed support and petitioned for the release of rapper gunna, who was imprisoned without bond, charged with one count of violating the racketeer influenced and corrupt organizations act. however, in october of the same year, gunna was again denied release from jail ahead of his january trial. in december, gunna pled guilty to a single charge of racketeering and was sentenced to five years in prison, with one year commuted to time served and the rest of the sentence suspended subject to probation conditions. he was soon released from jail, and instead was ordered to serve  hours of community service.

kim kardashian, superstar 

keeping up with the kardashians 

disaster movie 

kourtney and kim take miami 

kourtney and kim take new york 

temptation confessions of a marriage counselor 

dash dolls 

paw patrol the movie 

the kardashians 

american horror story delicate 

paw patrol the mighty movie 

teen choice awards

other awards

kardashian, kim; kardashian, kourtney; kardashian, khlo . kardashian konfidential. st. martins press. isbn .

kardashian, kim; kardashian, kourtney; kardashian, khlo . dollhouse. william morrow and company. isbn .

kardashian, kim . selfish. universe publishing. isbn .

john christopher depp ii  is an american actor and musician. he is the recipient of multiple accolades, including a golden globe award and a screen actors guild award, and has been nominated for three academy awards and two bafta awards. 

born in kentucky, depp aspired to be a musician, and was a member of several rock bands. he moved to los angeles at age , where he was introduced to actor nicolas cage, who advised him to pursue acting. depp made his feature film debut in the horror film a nightmare on elm street  and appeared in platoon , before rising to prominence as a teen idol on the television series  jump street . in the s, depp acted mostly in independent films with auteur directors, often playing eccentric characters. these included crybaby , whats eating gilbert grape , benny and joon , dead man , donnie brasco , fear and loathing in las vegas , and the ninth gate . depp also began his longtime collaboration with the director tim burton, portraying the leads in the films edward scissorhands , ed wood , and sleepy hollow .

in the s, depp became one of the most commercially successful film stars by playing captain jack sparrow in the walt disney swashbuckler film series pirates of the caribbean . he also received acclaim for chocolat , finding neverland  and public enemies , and continued his commercially successful collaboration with burton with the films charlie and the chocolate factory , corpse bride , sweeney todd the demon barber of fleet street , and alice in wonderland .

in , depp was one of the worlds biggest film stars, and was listed by the guinness world records as the worlds highestpaid actor, with earnings of us million in a year. during the s, depp began producing films through his company infinitum nihil. he also received acclaim for black mass  and formed the rock supergroup hollywood vampires with alice cooper and joe perry, before starring as gellert grindelwald in the wizarding world films fantastic beasts and where to find them  and fantastic beasts the crimes of grindelwald .

depp was named peoples sexiest man alive in , an accolade he received again in . between  and , depp was in a relationship with the french singer vanessa paradis, with whom he had two children, including the actress lilyrose depp. from  to , depp was married to the actress amber heard. their divorce drew media attention, as both alleged abuse against each other and both engaged in highly publicized defamation cases.

john christopher depp ii was born on june , , in owensboro, kentucky, the youngest of four children of waitress betty sue depp  and civil engineer john christopher depp. depps family moved frequently during his childhood, eventually settling in miramar, florida, in . his parents divorced in  when he was , and his mother later married robert palmer, whom depp has called an inspiration.depps mother gave him a guitar when he was , and he began playing in various bands. he dropped out of miramar high school at  in  to become a rock musician. he attempted to go back to school two weeks later, but the principal told him to follow his dream of being a musician. in , depp began playing in a band called the kids. after modest local success in florida, the band moved to los angeles in pursuit of a record deal, changing its name to six gun method. in addition to the band, depp worked a variety of odd jobs, such as in telemarketing. in december , depp married makeup artist lori anne allison, the sister of his bands bassist and singer. the kids split up before signing a record deal in , and depp began collaborating with the band rock city angels. he cowrote their song mary, which appeared on their debut geffen records album young mans blues. depp and allison divorced in .depp is of primarily english descent, with some french, german, and irish ancestry. his surname comes from a french huguenot immigrant, pierre dieppe, who settled in virginia around . he is also a descendant of elizabeth key grinstead, one of the first women of african american ancestry in the north american colonies to sue for her freedom and win. in interviews in  and , depp claimed to have native american ancestry, saying i guess i have some native american somewhere down the line. my greatgrandmother was quite a bit of native american. she grew up cherokee or maybe creek indian. makes sense in terms of coming from kentucky, which is rife with cherokee and creek indian. depps claims came under scrutiny when indian country today wrote that depp had never inquired about his heritage or been recognized as a member of the cherokee nation. this led to criticism of depp by the native american community, as depp has no documented native ancestry, and native community leaders consider him a nonindian and a pretendian. depps choice to portray tonto, a native american character, in the lone ranger was criticized, along with his choice to name his rock band tontos giant nuts. during the promotion for the lone ranger, depp was formally adopted as an honorary son by ladonna harris, a member of the comanche nation, making him an honorary member of her family but not a member of any tribe. depps comanche name given at the adoption was mah woo may, which means shape shifter. critical response to his claims from the native community increased after this, including satirical portrayals of depp by native comedians. an ad featuring depp and native american imagery, by dior for the fragrance sauvage, was pulled in  after being accused of cultural appropriation and racism.

depp moved to los angeles with his band when he was . after the band split up, depps thenwife lori ann allison introduced him to actor nicolas cage. after they became drinking buddies, cage advised him to pursue acting. depp had been interested in acting since reading a biography of james dean and watching rebel without a cause. cage helped depp get an audition with wes craven for a nightmare on elm street; depp, who had no acting experience, said he ended up acting by accident. thanks in part to his catching the eye of cravens daughter, depp landed the role of the main characters boyfriend, one of freddy kruegers victims.though depp said he didnt have any desire to be an actor, he continued to be cast in films, making enough to cover some bills that his musical career left unpaid. after a starring role in the  comedy private resort, depp was cast in the lead role of the  skating drama thrashin by the films director, but its producer overrode the decision. instead, depp appeared in a minor supporting role as a vietnamesespeaking private in oliver stones  vietnam war drama platoon. he became a teen idol during the late s, when he starred as an undercover police officer in a high school operation in the fox television series  jump street, which premiered in . he accepted this role to work with actor frederic forrest, who inspired him. despite his success, depp felt that the series forced him into the role of product.

disillusioned by his experiences as a teen idol in  jump street, depp began taking roles he found more interesting, rather than those he thought would succeed at the box office. his first film release in  was john waterss crybaby, a musical comedy set in the s. although not a boxoffice success upon its release, over the years it has gained cult classic status. also in , depp played the title character in tim burtons romantic fantasy film edward scissorhands opposite dianne wiest and winona ryder. the film was a commercial and critical success with a domestic gross of  million. in preparation for the role, depp watched many charlie chaplin films to study how to create sympathy without dialogue. peter travers of rolling stone praised depps performance, writing that he artfully expresses the fierce longing in gentle edward; its a terrific performance, while rita kempley of the washington post wrote that he brings the eloquence of the silent era to this part of few words, saying it all through bright black eyes and the tremulous care with which he holds his horrormovie hands. depp earned his first golden globe nomination for the film. owing to this role, a species of extinct arthropod with prominent claws was named after depp as kootenichela deppi .

depp had no film releases in the next two years, except a brief cameo in freddys dead the final nightmare , the sixth installment in the a nightmare on elm street franchise. he appeared in three films in . in the romantic comedy benny and joon, he played an eccentric and illiterate silent film fan who befriends a mentally ill woman and her brother; it became a sleeper hit. janet maslin of the new york times wrote that depp may look nothing like buster keaton, but there are times when he genuinely seems to become the great stone face, bringing keatons mannerisms sweetly and magically to life. depp received a second golden globe nomination for the performance. his second film of  was lasse hallstrms whats eating gilbert grape, a drama about a dysfunctional family costarring leonardo dicaprio and juliette lewis. it did not perform well commercially, but received positive notices from critics. although most of the reviews focused on dicaprio, who was nominated for an academy award for his performance, todd mccarthy of variety wrote that depp manages to command center screen with a greatly affable, appealing characterization. depps last  release was emir kusturicas surrealist comedydrama arizona dream, which opened to positive reviews and won the silver bear at the berlin film festival.

in , depp reunited with burton, playing the title role in ed wood, a biographical film about one of historys most inept film directors. depp later said that he was depressed about films and filmmaking at the time, but that within  minutes of hearing about the project, i was committed. he found that the role gave him a chance to stretch out and have some fun and that working with martin landau, who played bela lugosi, rejuvenated my love for acting. although it did not earn back its production costs, ed wood received a positive reception from critics, with maslin writing that depp had proved himself as an established, certified great actor and captured all the cando optimism that kept ed wood going, thanks to an extremely funny ability to look at the silver lining of any cloud. depp was nominated for a third time for a best musical or comedy actor golden globe for his performance.

the next year, depp starred in three films. he played opposite marlon brando in the boxoffice hit don juan demarco, as a man who believes he is don juan, the worlds greatest lover. he starred in jim jarmuschs dead man, a western shot entirely in blackandwhite; it was not a commercial success and had mixed critical reviews. and in the financial and critical failure nick of time, depp played an accountant who is told to kill a politician to save his kidnapped daughter.

in , depp and al pacino starred in the crime drama donnie brasco, directed by mike newell. depp played joseph d. pistone, an undercover fbi agent who assumes the name donnie brasco to infiltrate the mafia in new york city. to prepare, depp spent time with pistone, on whose memoirs the film was based. donnie brasco was a commercial and critical success, and is considered one of depps finest performances. also in , depp debuted as a director and screenwriter with the brave. he starred in it as a poor native american man who accepts a proposal from a wealthy man, played by marlon brando, to appear in a snuff film in exchange for money for his family. it premiered at the  cannes film festival to generally negative reviews. variety called it a turgid and unbelievable neowestern, and time out wrote that besides the implausibilities, the direction has two fatal flaws its both tediously slow and hugely narcissistic as the camera focuses repeatedly on depps bandanad head and rippling torso. due to the reviews, depp did not release the brave in the u.s.depp was a fan and friend of writer hunter s. thompson, and played his alter ego raoul duke in fear and loathing in las vegas , terry gilliams film adaptation of thompsons pseudobiographical novel of the same name. it was a boxoffice failure and polarized critics. later that year, depp made a brief cameo in mika kaurismkis l.a. without a map .

depp appeared in three films in . the first was the scifi thriller the astronauts wife, costarring charlize theron, which was not a commercial or critical success. the second, roman polanskis the ninth gate, starred depp as a seller of old books who becomes entangled in a mystery. it was moderately more successful with audiences but received mixed reviews. the third was burtons adaptation of the legend of sleepy hollow, where depp played ichabod crane opposite christina ricci and christopher walken. for his performance, depp took inspiration from angela lansbury, roddy mcdowall and basil rathbone, saying he always thought of ichabod as a very delicate, fragile person who was maybe a little too in touch with his feminine side, like a frightened little girl. sleepy hollow was a commercial and critical success.

depps first film release of the new millennium was britishfrench drama the man who cried , directed by sally potter and starring him as a roma horseman opposite christina ricci, cate blanchett, and john turturro. it was not a critical success. depp also had a supporting role in julian schnabels critically acclaimed before night falls . his final film of  was hallstrms critically and commercially successful chocolat, in which he played a roma man and the love interest of the main character, juliette binoche. depps next roles were both based on historical persons. in blow , he starred as cocaine smuggler george jung, who was part of the medelln cartel in the s. the film underperformed at the box office and received mixed reviews. in the comic book adaptation from hell , depp portrayed inspector frederick abberline, who investigated the jack the ripper murders in the s london. the film also received mixed reviews but was a moderate commercial success.

in , depp starred in the walt disney pictures adventure film pirates of the caribbean the curse of the black pearl, which was a major box office success. he earned widespread acclaim for his comic performance as pirate captain jack sparrow, and received academy award, golden globe and bafta nominations and won a screen actors guild award for best actor as well as an mtv movie award. depp has said that sparrow is definitely a big part of me, and that he modeled the character after the rolling stones guitarist keith richards and cartoon skunk pep le pew. studio executives had at first been ambivalent about depps portrayal, but the character became popular with audiences. in his other film release in , robert rodriguez action film once upon a time in mexico, depp played a corrupt cia agent. a moderate boxoffice success, it received average to good reviews, with depps performance in particular receiving praise.depp next starred as an author with writers block in the thriller secret window , based on a short story by stephen king. it was a moderate commercial success but received mixed reviews. released around the same time, the britishaustralian independent film the libertine  saw depp portray the seventeenthcentury poet and rake, the earl of rochester. it had only limited release, and received mainly negative reviews. depps third film of , finding neverland, was more positively received by the critics, and earned him his second academy award nomination as well as golden globe, bafta, and sag nominations for his performance as scottish author j. m. barrie. depp also made a brief cameo appearance in the french film happily ever after , and founded his own film production company, infinitum nihil, under warner bros. pictures.depp continued his boxoffice success with a starring role as willy wonka in tim burtons adaptation of charlie and the chocolate factory . it also had a positive critical reception, with depp being nominated again for the golden globe for best actor in a comedy or musical. chocolate factory was followed by another burton project, stopmotion animation corpse bride , in which depp voiced the main character, victor van dort. depp reprised the role of jack sparrow in the pirates sequels dead mans chest  and at worlds end , both of which were major box office successes. he also voiced the character in the video game pirates of the caribbean the legend of jack sparrow. according to a survey taken by fandango, depp in the role of jack sparrow was the main reason for many cinemagoers to see a pirates film.in , depp collaborated with burton for their sixth film together, this time playing murderous barber sweeney todd in the musical sweeney todd the demon barber of fleet street . depp cited peter lorres performance in mad love , in which lorre played a creepy but sympathetic surgeon, as his main influence for the role. sweeney todd was the first film in which depp had been required to sing. instead of hiring a qualified vocal coach, he prepared for the role by recording demos with his old bandmate bruce witkin. the film was a commercial and critical success. entertainment weeklys chris nashawaty stated that depps soaring voice makes you wonder what other tricks hes been hiding ... watching depps barber wield his razors ... its hard not to be reminded of edward scissorhands frantically shaping hedges into animal topiaries  years ago ... and all of the twisted beauty we wouldve missed out on had burton and depp never met. depp won the golden globe for best musical or comedy actor for the role, and was nominated for the third time for an academy award.

in , depp portrayed reallife gangster john dillinger in michael manns s crime film public enemies. it was commercially successful and gained moderately positive reviews. roger ebert stated in his review that this johnny depp performance is something else. for once an actor playing a gangster does not seem to base his performance on movies he has seen. he starts cold. he plays dillinger as a fact. depps second film of , the imaginarium of doctor parnassus, reunited him with director terry gilliam. depp, jude law, and colin farrell each played the character initially portrayed by their friend heath ledger, who had died before the film was completed. all three actors gave their salaries to ledgers daughter, matilda.depp began the s with another collaboration with tim burton, alice in wonderland , in which he played the mad hatter opposite helena bonham carter, anne hathaway and alan rickman. despite mixed reviews, it earned us. billion in the box office, thus becoming the secondhighestgrossing film of  and one of the highestgrossing films of all time. depps second film release of  was the romantic thriller the tourist, in which he starred opposite angelina jolie. it was commercially successful, although panned by critics. regardless, he received best actor in a musical or comedy golden globe nominations for both films.

depps first  film release was the animated film rango, in which he voiced the title character, a lizard. it was a major critical and commercial success. his second film of the year, the fourth installment in the pirates series, on stranger tides, was again a box office hit, becoming the thirdhighestgrossing film of . later in , depp released the first two projects coproduced by his company, infinitum nihil. the first was a film adaptation of the novel the rum diary by hunter s. thompson and starred depp. it failed to bring back its production costs and received mixed reviews. the companys second undertaking, martin scorseses hugo , garnered major critical acclaim and several awards nominations, but similarly did not perform well in the box office. in , depp also made a brief cameo in the adam sandler film jack and jill.

by , depp was one of the worlds biggest film stars, and was listed by the guinness world records as the worlds highestpaid actor, with earnings of us million. that year, he and his  jump street costars peter deluise and holly robinson reprised their roles in cameo appearances in the series feature film adaptation. depp also starred in and coproduced his eighth film with tim burton, dark shadows , alongside helena bonham carter, michelle pfeiffer, and eva green. the film was based on a s gothic television soap opera of the same name, which had been one of his favorites as a child. the films poor reception in the united states brought depps star appeal into question.

after infinitum nihils agreement with wb expired in , depp signed a multiyear firstlook deal with walt disney studios. the first film made in the collaboration was the lone ranger , in which depp starred as tonto. depps casting as a native american brought accusations of whitewashing, and the film was not well received by the public or the critics, causing disney to take a us million loss. following a brief cameo in the independent film lucky them , depp starred as an aistudying scientist in the scifi thriller transcendence , which was yet another commercial failure, and earned mainly negative reviews. his other roles in  were a minor supporting part as the wolf in the film adaptation of into the woods, and a more substantial appearance as eccentric frenchcanadian exdetective in kevin smiths horrorcomedy tusk, in which he was credited by the characters name, guy lapointe.

in , depp appeared in two films produced by infinitum nihil. the first was comedythriller mortdecai, in which he acted opposite gwyneth paltrow. the film was a critical and commercial failure and brought both stars golden raspberry nominations. the second film, black mass , in which he played boston crime boss whitey bulger, was better received. critics from the hollywood reporter and variety called it one of depps best performances to date, and the role earned depp his third nomination for the best actor sag award. however, the film failed to bring back its production costs. depp also made a cameo appearance in the critically panned london fields, starring his thenwife amber heard, which was to be released in , but its general release was delayed by litigation until . in addition to his work in films in , french luxury fashion house dior signed depp as the face of their mens fragrance, sauvage, and he was inducted as a disney legend.

depps first film release in  was yoga hosers, a sequel to tusk , in which depp appeared with his daughter, lilyrose depp. next, he played businessman and presidential candidate donald trump in a funny or die satire entitled donald trumps the art of the deal the movie, released during the runup to the us presidential election. he earned praise for the role, with a headline from the a.v. club declaring, who knew donald trump was the comeback role johnny depp needed it was also announced that depp had been cast in a new franchise role as dr. jack griffin/the invisible man in universal studioss planned shared film universe entitled the dark universe, a rebooted version of their classic universal monsters franchise. depp reprised the role of the mad hatter in tim burtons alice through the looking glass , the sequel to alice in wonderland. in contrast to the first films success, the sequel lost disney approximately us million. it also gained depp two golden raspberry nominations. depp had also been secretly cast to play dark wizard gellert grindelwald in a cameo appearance in fantastic beasts and where to find them , the first installment of the fantastic beasts franchise. his name was not mentioned in the promotional materials and his cameo was only revealed at the end of the film.in , depp appeared alongside other actors and filmmakers in the black ghiandola, a short film made by a terminally ill teenager through the nonprofit make a film foundation. he also reprised his role as captain jack sparrow in the fifth installment of the pirates series, dead men tell no tales . in the us, it did not perform as well as previous installments, and depp was nominated for two golden raspberry awards for worst actor and for worst screen combo with his wornout drunk routine. however, the film had a good box office return internationally, especially in china, japan and russia. depps last film release in  was the agatha christie adaptation murder on the orient express, in which he was part of an ensemble cast led by directorstar kenneth branagh.

in , depp voiced the title character sherlock gnomes in the animated movie gnomeo  juliet sherlock gnomes. although moderately commercially successful, it was critically panned and earned depp two golden raspberry nominations, one for his acting and another for his fastfading film career. depp then starred in two independent films, both produced by him and his company, infinitum nihil. the first was city of lies, in which he starred as russell poole, an lapd detective who attempts to solve the murders of rappers tupac shakur and the notorious b.i.g. it was set for release in september , but was pulled from the release schedule after a crew member sued depp for assault. the second film was the comedydrama richard says goodbye, in which depp played a professor with terminal cancer. it premiered at the zurich film festival in october . depps last film release of  was fantastic beasts the crimes of grindelwald, in which he reprised his role as grindelwald. depps casting received criticism from fans of the series due to the domestic violence allegations against him.depp also experienced other career setbacks around this time, as disney confirmed that they would not be casting him in new pirates installments and he was reported to no longer be attached to universals dark universe franchise. depps next films were the independent dramas waiting for the barbarians , based on a novel by j.m. coetzee, and minamata , in which he portrayed photographer w. eugene smith and which premiered at the  berlin international film festival. in november , depp resigned from his role as grindelwald in the fantastic beasts franchise at the request of its production company, warner bros., after he lost his uk libel case against the sun, which had accused him of being a domestic abuser. he was replaced by mads mikkelsen. soon after, the hollywood reporter called depp persona nongrata in the film industry.

in march , city of lies, which was originally scheduled for , was released in theaters and streaming services. the same month, an online petition to bring depp back to the pirates franchise, begun four months earlier, reached its goal of , signatures. his pirates costar kevin mcnally also expressed support for depp returning to the role. in july , andrew levitas, the director of minamata , accused mgm of trying to bury the film due to depps involvement, with depp claiming he is being boycotted by the hollywood industry and calling his changed reputation an absurdity of media mathematics. minamata was released in the uk and ireland in august , and in north america in december . the film received positive reviews, with multiple publications praising depps performance as his best in years. depp also continues as the face of diors mens fragrance, sauvage.depp received multiple honorary awards at numerous european film festivals, including at the camerimage festival in poland, the karlovy vary international film festival in the czech republic, and the san sebastin international film festival in spain, where depp was awarded the donostia award. these awards were controversial, with various domestic violence charities criticizing the festivals. the organisers of the ceremonies released statements defending their decision to award depp, with the san sebastian film festival stating that he has not been charged by any authority in any jurisdiction, nor convicted of any form of violence against women.

in september , depp described himself as a victim of cancel culture. the same month, he launched in., a londonbased sister company to his production company, infinitum nihil, and announced that in. and the spanish production company a contracorriente films were starting a new development fund for tv and film projects.on february , , depp received the serbian gold medal of merit from president aleksandar vui for outstanding merits in public and cultural activities, especially in the field of film art and the promotion of the republic of serbia in the world. minamata and animated series puffins were shot in the country.on  may , depp, who was still awaiting a verdict in his highly publicised defamation trial against exwife amber heard, made a surprise appearance at a jeff beck gig in sheffield, playing guitar alongside beck to three classic songs from john lennon, marvin gaye and jimi hendrix. depp joined beck on his last concert tour in the u.k. and europe during june and july and in the united states in october and november, to promote their album .in august , he made a cameo appearance at the  mtv video music awards.in , depp was cast as king louis xv in french actordirector mawenns period film jeanne du barry. jeanne du barry tells the story of madame du barry, an impoverished seamstress who rises through the ranks of louis xvs court to become his official mistress. netflix cofinanced and will stream the french period drama. this was the first film for depp where he acts in french. the film premiered at the  cannes film festival opening the festival and received a mixed reception from film critics. depp was praised for his performance with deadline hollywood writing, mawenn the director leans heavily into depps chops as a visual actor. depps deadpan face throughout is priceless. variety critic however gave a mixed response saying for his part, depp delivers his lines in wellturned french, wearing fine powder and a stiff white wig, and yet he seems strangely uncomfortable in the role  adequate but not especially engaged.

in august , depp was set to direct mod, a film about amedeo modigliani, which he will coproduce alongside al pacino and barry navidi. the film is based on a play by dennis mcintyre, which was previously adapted for the  film of the same name, from a screenplay by jerzy and mary kromolowski. principal photography commenced in september  in budapest, hungary.

in , depp founded film production company infinitum nihil to develop projects where he will serve as actor or producer. he serves as its ceo, while his sister, christi dembrowski, serves as president. the companys first two film releases were the rum diary  and hugo .a european sistercompany to infinitum nihil, entitled in., was launched in september . in a press release, depp stated from the student to the maestro, from the aspiring artists to the yetknowns, to the wellestablished great masters across all forms of modern media, in. will build a space where artists can be artists, where they will be free to create those unexpected moments, those happy accidents that contain the propensity to constitute great art and so bring their unique vision to life.depp coowned the nightclub the viper room in los angeles from  to , and he was also part owner of the restaurantbar man ray in paris for a short period of time. depp and douglas brinkley edited folk singer woody guthries novel house of earth, which was published in .

prior to his acting career, depp was a guitarist, and has later featured on songs by oasis, shane macgowan, iggy pop, vanessa paradis, aerosmith, marilyn manson, and the new basement tapes, among others. he also performed with manson at the revolver golden gods awards in . depp played guitar on the soundtrack of his films chocolat and once upon a time in mexico, and has appeared in music videos for tom petty and the heartbreakers, the lemonheads, avril lavigne and paul mccartney. in the s, he was also a member of p, a musical group featuring butthole surfers singer gibby haynes, red hot chili peppers bassist flea and sex pistols guitarist steve jones.

in , depp formed the supergroup hollywood vampires with alice cooper and joe perry; the band also includes bruce witkin, his friend from his s band, the kids. hollywood vampires released their selftitled debut studio album in september . it featured eleven classic rock covers, as well as three original songs . the band made their live debut at the roxy in los angeles in september , and has since done three world tours in ,  and .  their second studio album, rise, was released in june  and consists mostly of original material, including songs written by depp. the album also features a cover version of david bowies heroes, sung by depp.in , depp released a cover of john lennons isolation with guitarist jeff beck, and stated that they would be releasing more music together in the future. beginning in may , depp joined beck onstage for a number of concerts in the united kingdom, where beck announced they had recorded an album together. their joint record, titled , was released on july , . depp also accompanied beck on his last european and american tours, which began in june and ended in november. in may , depp performed at the jeff beck tribute concerts held at the royal albert hall in london, sharing the stage with eric clapton, rod stewart, ronnie wood and kirk hammett among others.

in july , artwork made by depp sold out in less than a day since it debuted in the art retailer castle fine art gallery in londons covent garden. the art house hosted his friends  heroes collection, which was described as paintings of people who have inspired him as a person. among the art pieces, the names include actors al pacino and elizabeth taylor and musicians bob dylan and keith richards. depp made for nearly  million and sold  prints through the art houses  galleries. ahead of the sale, depp expressed his desire to display his art publicly and stated, ive always used art to express my feelings and to reflect on those who matter most to me, like my family, friends and people i admire. he added, my paintings surround my life, but i kept them to myself and limited myself. no one should ever limit themselves. all  pieces sold within hours, with framed individual images going for , and the complete portfolio of four images selling for ,. this worldfirst release proved to be our fastestselling collection to date, with all titles selling out in just hours, the gallery announced on instagram. speaking on behalf of fine art publishers, washington green glyn washington described depp as a true creative, with an extraordinary eye for detail and nuance.a second instalment in the friends  heroes collection, this time entitled friends  heroes ii was released in march . prints of public figures heath ledger, bob marley, river phoenix and hunter s. thompson were made available for sale, as a fourpiece, and signed by depp, or sold individually. in july , depp unveiled an auto portrait, entitled five which he had painted in . the meaning of the number five is, according to depp, linked the fact that he was about to enter the fifth year of a dark phase in his life. depp spoke about the difficulty in creating a selfportrait, stating its not the most comfortable thing doing a selfportrait. although, in a weird way, almost everything you do is a selfportrait in one way or another. the collections were once again hosted by castle fine art gallery.

in the s, depp was seen as a new type of male film star that rejected the norms of that role. after becoming a teen idol in  jump street, he publicly protested against the image, and with his subsequent film and public relations choices began to cultivate a new public persona. the sydney morning herald characterized depp in the s as the bad boy of hollywood; depps chain smoking, recreational drug use and drinking habits were generally documented during this time. according to the guardian journalist hadley freeman in 

along with phoenix and keanu reeves, he was part of a holy trinity of grunge heartthrobs. they were the opposite of the beverly hills,  boys, or brad pitt and dicaprio, because they seemed embarrassed by their looks, even resentful of them. ...this uninterest in their own prettiness made them seem edgy, even while their prettiness softened that edge. they signified not just a different kind of celebrity, but a different kind of masculinity desirable but gentle, manly but girlish. depp in particular was the cool pinup it was safe to like, and the safe pinup it was cool to like. we fans understood that there was more to depp, phoenix and reeves than handsomeness. they were artisticthey had bandsand they thought really big thoughts, which they would ramble on about confusingly in interviews. if we dated them, we understood that our role would be to understand their souls.

similarly, film scholar anna everett has described depps s films and public persona as antimacho and genderbending, going against the conventions of a hollywood leading man. after  jump street, depp chose to work in independent films, often taking on quirky roles that sometimes even completely obscured his looks, such as edward scissorhands. critics often described depps characters as iconic loners or gentle outsiders. according to depp, his onetime agent, tracey jacobs of united talent agency , had to take a lot of heat over the years for his role choices; depp characterized higherups at uta as thinking, jesus christ when does he do a movie where he kisses the girl when does he get to pull a gun out and shoot somebody when does he get to be a fucking man for a change when is he finally going to do a blockbuster depp also cultivated the image of a bad boy. according to everett, his rulebreaking roles matched with the much publicized rebelliousness, unconventionality, and volatility ascribed to depps own personal life throughout the decade. from reports of his repeated confrontations with the police, trashing of a hotel room, chain smoking, drinking, and drug use, to his multiple engagements to such glamorous women as supermodel kate moss and hollywood starlet winona ryder and others, we clearly see a perfect fit between his nonconformist star image and his repertoire of outsider characters.

after a decade of appearing mainly in independent films with varying commercial success, depp became one of the biggest boxoffice draws in the s with his role as captain jack sparrow in walt disney studios pirates of the caribbean franchise. the five films in the series have earned us. billion as of . in addition to the pirates franchise, depp also made four further films with tim burton that were major successes, with one, alice in wonderland , becoming the biggest commercial hit of depps career and one of the highestgrossing films in history .according to film scholar murray pomerance, depps collaboration with disney can be seen to purport and herald a new era for johnny depp, one in which he is, finally, as though longpromised and longexpected, the proud proprietor of a muchaccepted career; not only a star but a middleclass hero. in , the same year as the first film in the pirates series was released, depp was named worlds sexiest man by people; he would receive the title again in . during the decade and into the s, depp was one of the biggest and most popular film stars in the world and was named by public vote as favorite male movie star at the peoples choice awards every year for  through . in , depp became the highestpaid actor in the american film industry, earning as high as  million per film, and as of , is the tenth highestgrossing actor worldwide, with his films having grossed over us. billion at the united states box office and over us billion worldwide. although a mainstream favorite with the audiences, critics views on depp changed in the s, becoming more negative as he was seen to conform more to the hollywood ideal. regardless, depp continued to eschew more traditional leadingman roles until towards the end of the s, when he starred as john dillinger in public enemies .in the s, depps films were less successful, with many bigbudget studio films such as dark shadows , the lone ranger , and alice through the looking glass  which underperformed at the box office. depp also received negative publicity due to allegations of domestic violence, substance abuse, poor onset behavior and the loss of his us million fortune. after losing a highly publicized libel trial against the publishers of the sun, depp was asked to resign from warner bros. fantastic beasts franchise. many publications alleged that depp would struggle to find further work in major studio productions in the future.

depp owns a property in west hollywood and currently lives in london. by february , he had not yet bought a property there, instead choosing to either stay at hotels or at friends houses.

depp and makeup artist lori anne allison were married from  until . in the late s, he was engaged to actresses jennifer grey and sherilyn fenn. in , he proposed to his edward scissorhands costar winona ryder, whom he had begun dating the year prior when she was  and he was . they ended their relationship in ; depp later had the winona forever tattoo on his right arm changed to wino forever.

between  and , he was in a relationship with english model kate moss. following his breakup from moss, depp began a relationship with french actress and singer vanessa paradis, whom he met while filming the ninth gate in france in . they have two children, daughter lilyrose melody depp  and a son, jack . depp stated that having children has given him a real foundation, a real strong place to stand in life, in work, in everything ...you cannot plan the kind of deep love that results in children. fatherhood was not a conscious decision. it was part of the wonderful ride i was on. it was destiny. all the math finally worked. in june , depp and paradis announced their separation.

following the end of his relationship with vanessa paradis, depp began dating actress amber heard, with whom he had costarred in the rum diary . depp and heard were married in a civil ceremony on february , . heard filed for divorce on may , , and obtained a temporary restraining order against depp, alleging in her court declaration that he had been verbally and physically abusive throughout their relationship, usually while under the influence of drugs or alcohol. depp denied these claims and alleged that she was attempting to secure a premature financial resolution. a settlement was reached in august , and the divorce was finalized in january . heard dismissed the restraining order, and they issued a joint statement saying that their relationship was intensely passionate and at times volatile, but always bound by love. neither party has made false accusations for financial gain. there was never any intent of physical or emotional harm. depp paid heard a divorce settlement of us million, which she pledged to donate to the aclu and the childrens hospital los angeles .

in , depp brought a libel lawsuit in the uk against news group newspapers , publishers of the sun, over an april  article titled gone potty how can j k rowling be genuinely happy casting wife beater johnny depp in the new fantastic beasts film. the case had a highly publicized trial in july , with both depp and heard testifying for several days. in november , the high court of justice ruled that  of the  incidents of violence claimed by heard were substantially true. the court rejected depps claim of a hoax and accepted that the allegations heard had made against depp had damaged her career and activism. following the verdict, depp resigned from the fantastic beasts franchise, after being asked to do so by its production company, warner bros.depp appealed the verdict, with his lawyers accusing heard of not following through on a promise to donate her divorce settlement to charity contrary to her testimony. depps lawyers also asserted that heards donation testimony had significantly influenced the judges view of heard. in response, heards legal team stated that she had not yet donated the full amount due to the financial burden of the lawsuits against her by depp. depps appeal to overturn the verdict was rejected by the england and wales court of appeal in march , with the court of appeal stating we do not accept that there is any ground for believing that the judge may have been influenced by any such general perception...in the first place, he does not refer to her charitable donation at all in the context of his central findings...on the contrary, he only mentions it in a very particular context...and after he had already reached his conclusions in relation to the  incidents..

in february , depp sued heard for defamation over a december  oped for the washington post. the lawsuit ultimately resulting in depp alleging that the oped contained three defamatory statements first, its headline, amber heard i spoke up against sexual violence  and faced our cultures wrath. that has to change; second, heards writing then two years ago, i became a public figure representing domestic abuse, and i felt the full force of our cultures wrath for women who speak out; and third, heards writing i had the rare vantage point of seeing, in real time, how institutions protect men accused of abuse. depp alleged that he had been the one who was abused by heard, that her allegations constituted a hoax against him, and that as a consequence, disney had declined to cast him in future projects.heard countersued depp in august , alleging that he had coordinated a harassment campaign via twitter and by orchestrating online petitions in an effort to get her fired from aquaman and loreal. ultimately, heards countersuit went to trial over three allegations that depp had defamed her through statements made by his thenlawyer, adam waldman, published in the daily mail in april  first, waldman stated that heard and her friends in the media used fake sexual violence allegations as both sword and shield, publicizing a sexual violence hoax against depp; second, waldman stated that in one incident at a penthouse, amber and her friends spilled a little wine and roughed the place up, got their stories straight under the direction of a lawyer and publicist, and then placed a second call to  as a hoax against depp; third, waldman stated that there had been an abuse hoax by heard against depp.in october , the judge in the case dismissed depps lawyer adam waldman after he leaked confidential information covered by a protective order to the media. following the verdict in depps lawsuit against the sun the next month, heards lawyers filed to have the defamation suit dismissed, but judge penny azcarate ruled against it because heard had not been a party in the uk case. in august , a new york judge ruled that the aclu must disclose documents related to heards charity pledge to the organization.the deppheard trial took place in fairfax county, virginia on april , . on the day of the trial, he confided in writer and journalist jessica reed kraus about his dissatisfaction with the way the traditional media has painted him. during the trial, heard accused depp of domestic abuse, stating that depp plunged into the depths of paranoia and violence after binging on drugs and alcohol during their relationship. while depp accused heard of several instances of physical and verbal abuse during their relationship.on june , , the jury returned a verdict after  hours of deliberation. in their verdict, the jury found that all three statements from heards oped were false, defamed depp, and were made with actual malice. the jury awarded depp  million in compensatory damages and  million in punitive damages, though the punitive damages were reduced to , due to a limit imposed by an existing virginia state law. for heards countersuit, the jury found that waldmans first and third statements to the daily mail were not defamatory, while finding that waldmans second statement to the daily mail was false, defamatory, and made with actual malice. as a result, heard was awarded  million in compensatory damages and zero in punitive damages from depp.depp reacted to the result of the trial by declaring that the jury gave me my life back. i am truly humbled. depp also stated that he was overwhelmed by the outpouring of love and the colossal support and kindness from around the world. he continued i hope that my quest to have the truth be told will have helped others, men or women, who have found themselves in my situation, and that those supporting them never give up. depp also highlighted the noble work of the judge, the jurors, the court staff and the sheriffs who have sacrificed their own time to get to this point, and praised his diligent and unwavering legal team for an extraordinary job.after they filed to appeal the verdict, heard and depp settled the case in december , with heard maintaining that the settlement was not an act of concession; meanwhile depps lawyers stated that the jurys unanimous decision and the resulting judgement in mr. depps favor against ms. heard remain fully in place, and that the settlement would result in  million being paid to depp, which depp is pledging and will donate to charities.

depp was arrested in vancouver in  for assaulting a security guard after the police were called to end a loud party at his hotel room. he was also arrested in new york city in  after causing significant damage to his room at the mark hotel, where he was staying with kate moss, his girlfriend. the charges were dropped against him after he agreed to pay us, in damages.depp was arrested again in  for brawling with paparazi, when the photographers tried to take his picture. he allegedly threatened them with a wooden plank when they approached him outside mirabelle restaurant in central london early on sunday morning.in , uc irvine medical professor robin eckert sued depp and three security firms, premier group international, damian executive production inc. and staff pro inc., claiming to have been roughed up by his bodyguards at a concert in los angeles in . during the incident, she was allegedly handcuffed and dragged  feet across the floor, resulting in injuries including a dislocated elbow. depps attorneys contended that eckert provoked the alleged assault and therefore consented to any assault and battery. eckerts court papers stated that depp, despite being his security guards direct manager, did nothing to stop the attack. before the case went to trial, depp settled with eckert for an undisclosed sum, according to tmz.in april , depp and his thenwife amber heard breached australias biosecurity laws when they failed to declare their two dogs to the customs when they flew to queensland, where he was working on a film. heard pleaded guilty to falsifying quarantine documents, stating that she had made a mistake due to sleep deprivation. she was placed on a , onemonth good behavior bond for producing a false document; heard and depp also released a video in which they apologized for their behavior and urged people to adhere to the biosecurity laws. the guardian called the case the highest profile criminal quarantine case in australian history.in march , depp cut ties with his management company, the management group , and sued them in january  for alleged embezzlement and for allegedly improperly managing his money and leaving him over  million in debt. tmg stated that depp was responsible for his own fiscal mismanagement and countersued him for unpaid fees. in a related suit, depp also sued his lawyers, bloom hergott, in january . both lawsuits were settled, the former in  and the latter in .in , two of depps former bodyguards sued him for unpaid fees and unsafe working conditions. the suit was settled in .also in , depp was sued for allegedly hitting and verbally insulting a crew member while under the influence of alcohol on the set of city of lies. a lawyer for depp told the media that depp never touched the crew member, as over a dozen witnesses present will attest; meanwhile depps legal team entered a court filing that did not admit that depp hit the crew member, but stated that the crew member provoked the incident with unlawful and wrongful conduct, causing depp and film director brad furman to fear for their safety. a film script supervisor submitted a court declaration that depp did not hit the crew member, and only scolded him. before the lawsuit went to trial, a tentative settlement regarding the dismissal of the lawsuit was reached between depp and the crew member in july .

depp has struggled with substance abuse for much of his life. he has stated that he began using drugs by taking his mothers nerve pills at the age of , was smoking at age  and by the age of  had used every kind of drugs there were. in a  interview, depp acknowledged past abuse of alcohol during the filming of whats eating gilbert grape . in a  interview, depp stated that he had poisoned himself with alcohol for years. in , depp declared that he had stopped drinking alcohol, adding that he pretty much got everything he could get out of it; depp also said, i investigated wine and spirits thoroughly, and they certainly investigated me as well, and we found out that we got along beautifully, but maybe too well. regarding his breakup with longtime partner vanessa paradis, depp said that he definitely wasnt going to rely on the drink to ease things or cushion the blow or cushion the situation ...because that could have been fatal.

in a  rolling stone profile of depp, reporter stephen rodrick wrote that he had used hashish in his presence and described him as alternately hilarious, sly and incoherent; depp also said that the allegation made by his former business managers that he had spent us, per month on wine was insulting because he had spent far more than that amount. during his  libel trial, depp admitted to having been addicted to roxicodone and to having misused alcohol. he also admitted to using other substances such as marijuana, mdma and cocaine.

in november , depp joined the campaign imprisoned for art to call for the release of ukrainian filmmaker oleg sentsov, who was being held in custody in russia.at the glastonbury festival , depp, criticizing president donald trump, asked when was the last time an actor assassinated a president i want to clarify im not an actor. i lie for a living. however, its been a while and maybe its time. im not insinuating anything. the comment was interpreted as a reference to john wilkes booth, the actor who assassinated abraham lincoln. shawn holtzclaw of the secret service told cnn they were aware of depps comment, but that for security reasons, we cannot discuss specifically nor in general terms the means and methods of how we perform our protective responsibilities. depp apologized shortly afterward, saying the remark did not come out as intended, and i intended no malice.

the marvel cinematic universe  films are a series of american superhero films produced by marvel studios based on characters that appear in publications by marvel comics. the mcu is the shared universe in which all of the films are set. the films have been in production since , and in that time marvel studios has produced and released  films, with at least  more in various stages of development. it is the highestgrossing film franchise of all time, having grossed over . billion at the global box office. this includes avengers endgame, which became the highestgrossing film of all time at the time of its release.

kevin feige has produced every film in the series, alongside avi arad for the first two releases, gale anne hurd for the incredible hulk, amy pascal for the spiderman films, stephen broussard for antman and the wasp and antman and the wasp quantumania, jonathan schwartz for shangchi and the legend of the ten rings, nate moore for eternals, black panther wakanda forever, and captain america brave new world, brad winderbaum for thor love and thunder, ryan reynolds and shawn levy for deadpool , and eric carroll for blade. the films are written and directed by a variety of individuals and feature large, often ensemble, casts.

marvel studios releases its films in groups called phases. its first film is iron man , which was distributed by paramount pictures. paramount also distributed iron man  , thor , and captain america the first avenger , while universal pictures distributed the incredible hulk . walt disney studios motion pictures began distributing the series with the crossover film the avengers , which concluded phase one. phase two comprises iron man  , thor the dark world , captain america the winter soldier , guardians of the galaxy , avengers age of ultron , and antman .

captain america civil war  is the first film of phase three, and is followed by doctor strange , guardians of the galaxy vol.  , spiderman homecoming , thor ragnarok , black panther , avengers infinity war , antman and the wasp , captain marvel , avengers endgame , and spiderman far from home . the first three phases are collectively known as the infinity saga. the spiderman films are owned, financed, and distributed by sony pictures.

phase fours group of films began with black widow , and was followed by shangchi and the legend of the ten rings , eternals , spiderman no way home , doctor strange in the multiverse of madness , thor love and thunder , and black panther wakanda forever . the phase featured these films, as well as eight television series and two specials for the streaming service disney.

phase five begins with antman and the wasp quantumania , followed by guardians of the galaxy vol.  , the marvels , deadpool  , captain america brave new world , thunderbolts , and blade . this phase will also include a total of seven seasons of television series for disney. phase six will include fantastic four , avengers the kang dynasty , and avengers secret wars . the fourth, fifth, and sixth phases are collectively known as the multiverse saga.

by , marvel entertainment had begun planning to produce its own films independently and distribute them through paramount pictures. in june , marvel studios raised secured funding from a  million revolving credit facility with merrill lynch. marvels plan was to release individual films for their main characters and then merge them in a crossover film.in november , marvel studios president kevin feige said that in an ideal world releases each year would include one film based on an existing character and one featuring a new character, saying its a nice rhythm in that format. while not always the case, as evident by the  releases of iron man  and thor the dark world, he said it is certainly something to aim for. feige expanded on this in july , saying, i dont know that well keep to that model every year, but were doing that in  and , so i think it would be fun to continue that sort of thing. after the reveal of multiple release dates for films through  in july , in which some had three films scheduled, feige stated there was not a number cruncher telling the studio to increase their film output, but rather it was about managing existing franchises, film to film, and when we have a team ready to go, why tell them to go away for four years just because we dont have a slot wed rather find a way to keep that going. after the titles were revealed in october , feige said, the studios firing on all cylinders right now ... which made us comfortable for the first time ... to increase to three films a year in  and  instead of just two, without changing our methods. on the potential for superhero fatigue, feige stated, though each of the films are based on the marvel comics and feature the marvel studios logo, he believed each film had their own distinctions to help differentiate them from other mcu and superhero films. for example, he noted how the  releases of the studio, captain america civil war and doctor strange, were two completely different movies. the studio hoped to continue to surprise audiences and ensure the studio was not falling into things becoming too similar.in february , feige stated that marvel studios wants to mimic the rhythm that the comic books have developed, by having the characters appear in their own films, and then come together, much like a big event or crossover series, with avengers films acting as big, giant linchpins. on expanding the characters in the universe and letting individual films breathe and work on their own, as opposed to having avenger teamups outside of avengers films, feige stated, it is about teaching the general moviegoing audience about the notion of the characters existing separately, coming together for specific events and going away and existing separately in their own worlds again. just like comic readers have been doing for decades and decades ... people sort of are accepting that theres just a time when they should be together and theres a time when theyre not.in april , on moving the universe to phase four and reflecting on the first three, feige said, i think there will be a finality to moments of phase three, as well as new beginnings that will mark a different, a very different, a distinctively different chapter in what will someday be a complete first saga made up of three phases. frequent director joe russo added phase three was the deconstruction phase of the mcu, beginning with captain america civil war  leading into the culmination films of avengers infinity war  and avengers endgame . a year later, feige felt after the conclusion of phase three, marvel might abandon grouping the films by phases, saying, it might be a new thing. feige mentioned that avengers endgame would provide a definitive end to the films and storylines preceding it, with the franchise having two distinct periods. everything before endgame and everything after. many of the planned films following endgame were intentionally completely different from the films in the infinity saga.in july , feige announced the phase four slate at san diego comiccon, consisting of films and television event series on disney. in december , at disneys investor day, marvel studios provided updates to previously announced films for the phase. in late june , feige said that as phase four was nearing its conclusion, he felt audiences would begin to see where the next saga of the mcu would be heading, and added that there had been many clues throughout the phase to what that would be. he said marvel studios would be a little more direct on their future plans in the following months to provide audiences with the bigger picture so they can see a tiny, tiny bit more of the roadmap. in july , feige unveiled the phase five and six slates at san diego comiccon, similarly consisting of films and disney series, and revealed that these three phases would make up the multiverse saga.on how much story is developed for future films of the universe, feige said in september  there are broad strokes, though sometimes superspecific things. he continued that there was enough leeway to have room to sway and to move and to go and to surprise ourselves in places that we end up and that each film would feel satisfying on its own, but still interconnected to the larger universe and as if it had been planned years ahead of time. the studio also has various contingency plans for the direction of all of their films, in the event they are unable to secure a certain actor to reprise a role, or reacquire the film rights to a character, such as was done in february  with spiderman.

marvel studios releases its films in groups called phases.

the films from phase one through phase three are collectively known as the infinity saga.

the films from phase four through phase six are collectively known as the multiverse saga. they also include multiple series and two specials streaming on disney.

at any given time, marvel studios has future films planned five to six years out from what they have announced. by april , additional storylines were planned through , with mcu films through  being planned by april . disney has scheduled additional release dates for unannounced marvel studios films on february , july , and november , .

james rhodes must confront one of tony starks greatest fears when starks tech falls into the wrong hands.in december , marvel studios announced armor wars as a disney series based on the comic book storyline of the same name, with don cheadle reprising his role as james rhodes / war machine. in august , yassir lester was hired as the series head writer. in september , marvel studios decided to rework the series into a feature film, with cheadle and lester remaining with the project. filming was expected to begin in early , at trilith studios in atlanta, georgia.armor wars is set after the events of secret invasion . walton goggins is set to reprise his role as sonny burch from antman and the wasp .

by august , a fourth mcu spiderman film was reportedly in development alongside spiderman no way home . in november , producer amy pascal revealed that sony and marvel studios were planning on making at least three more spiderman films starring tom holland as peter parker / spiderman, with work on the first of those films getting ready to begin. marvel studios and sony were actively developing the films story the following month. writers had begun work on the film in february , with pascal confirming at the end of may that the film was still in development but that work was put on hold because of the  writers guild of america strike that began earlier that month, and that work would resume after the strike concluded. by that time, holland reiterated that the film was in early stages of development and that he had been involved in meetings about it, which were also put on hold because of the writers strike.

in december , a sequel to shangchi and the legend of the ten rings  was announced to be in development, with destin daniel cretton returning to write and direct. simu liu was expected to return as shangchi by the following month.

at san diego comiccon in july , kevin feige stated that mutants would eventually be introduced to the mcu, which include xmen, and said those terms are interchangeable and that the mcu depiction would differ from th century foxs xmen film series. by september , marvel studios was preparing to meet with writers for an xmen film later that year.

marvel studios is working on an unknown project with scarlett johansson, who will serve as a producer. the project was still being developed by midjune , when work was paused due to the writers strike.

over time, the distribution rights to marvel studios films changed hands on multiple occasions. in november , universal pictures announced that it would distribute the incredible hulk , in an arrangement separate from marvels  deal with paramount, which was distributing marvels other films. in september , after the international success of iron man , paramount signed a deal to have worldwide distribution rights for iron man  , iron man  , thor , captain america the first avenger , and the avengers .in late december , the walt disney company purchased marvel entertainment for  billion. additionally, in october , walt disney studios bought the distribution rights for the avengers and iron man  from paramount pictures, with paramounts logo remaining on the films, as well as for promotional material and merchandise, although walt disney studios motion pictures is the only studio credited at the end of these films. disney has distributed all subsequent marvel studios films. in july , disney purchased the distribution rights to iron man, iron man , thor and captain america the first avenger from paramount. the incredible hulk was not part of the deal at the time, due to an agreement between marvel and universal, where marvel owns the film rights and universal owns the distribution rights, for this film as well as the right of first refusal to distribute future hulk films. according to the hollywood reporter, a potential reason why marvel has not bought the film distribution rights to the hulk as they did with paramount for the iron man, thor, and captain america films is because universal holds the theme park rights to several marvel characters that disney wants for its own theme parks. in june , the distribution rights to the incredible hulk reverted from universal back to marvel studios and disney.

in february , sony pictures entertainment and marvel studios announced a licensing deal that would allow spiderman to appear in the marvel cinematic universe, with the character first appearing in captain america civil war. marvel studios explored opportunities to integrate other characters of the marvel cinematic universe into future spiderman films financed, distributed, and controlled by sony pictures, with robert downey jr. the first confirmed to reprise his role as tony stark / iron man in spiderman homecoming . in june , feige clarified that the initial sony deal does not apply to the mcu television series, as it was very specific ... with a certain amount of back and forth allowed. both studios have the ability to terminate the agreement at any point, and no money was exchanged with the deal. however, a small adjustment was made to a  deal formed between the two studios , with marvel getting to reduce their  million payment to sony if spiderman homecoming grossed more than  million. marvel studios still received  of first dollar gross for the film. sony also paid marvel studios an undisclosed producer fee for homecoming.in august , it was reported that disney and sony could not reach a new agreement regarding spiderman films, with marvel studios and feige said to no longer have any involvement in future films. deadline hollywood noted that disney had hoped future films would be a / cofinancing arrangement between the studios, with the possibility to extend the deal to other spidermanrelated films, an offer sony rejected and did not counter. instead, sony hoped to keep the terms of the previous agreement , with disney refusing. the hollywood reporter added that the lack of a new agreement would see the end of hollands spiderman in the mcu. variety cited unnamed sources claiming negotiations had hit an impasse and that a new deal could still be reached. in september , it was announced that disney and sony had reached a new agreement allowing for spiderman to appear in spiderman no way home  as the third film coproduced by marvel studios and sony pictures and a future marvel studios film. disney was reported to be cofinancing  of the film in exchange for  of the films profits in the new agreement, while retaining the merchandising rights to the character.in november , producer amy pascal revealed that sony and marvel studios were planning on making at least three more spiderman films starring holland, with work on the first of those films getting ready to begin. however, the hollywood reporter noted that there were no official plans for a new trilogy, despite the strong working relationship between the studios. the following month, feige said that he, pascal, disney, and sony were actively beginning to develop the next spiderman story, assuring that there would not be any separation trauma that occurred between far from home and no way home.

in june , marvel announced a disc box set titled marvel cinematic universe phase one  avengers assembled, for release on september , . the box set includes all six of the phase one filmsiron man, the incredible hulk, iron man , thor, captain america the first avenger, and the avengerson bluray and bluray d, in a replica of nick furys briefcase from the avengers. in august , luggage company rimowa gmbh, who developed the briefcase for the avengers, filed suit against marvel studios and buena vista home entertainment in u.s. federal court, complaining that marvel did not obtain any license or authorization from rimowa to make replica copies of the cases for any purpose. the set was delayed to early  for the packaging to be redesigned. the box set, with a redesigned case, was released on april , . in addition, the box set included a featurette on the thenupcoming phase two films, showing footage and concept art, as well as previously unreleased deleted scenes from all of the phase one films.in july , marvel announced a disc box set titled marvel cinematic universe phase two collection, for release on december , , exclusive to amazon.com. the box set includes all six of the phase two filmsiron man , thor the dark world, captain america the winter soldier, guardians of the galaxy, avengers age of ultron, and antmanon bluray, bluray d and a digital copy, in a replica of the orb from guardians of the galaxy, plus a bonus disc and exclusive memorabilia. material on the bonus disc includes all of the marvel oneshots with commentary, deleted scenes and preproduction creative features for each of the films, featurettes on the making of the postcredit scenes for the films, and first looks at captain america civil war, doctor strange, and guardians of the galaxy vol. .in september , feige indicated a box set with all  films of the infinity saga would be released, with the set including previously unreleased deleted scenes and other footage, such as an alternate take of the nick fury postcredits scene from iron man which references spiderman, the hulk, and the xmen. the box set, featuring all  films on ultra hd bluray and bluray, a bonus disc, a letter from feige, and a lithograph art piece by matt ferguson, was released on november , , exclusively at best buy.

in march , marvel studios presold the us cable broadcast rights to fx for five of their films, including iron man and the incredible hulk, for four years. fx also acquired the rights to iron man  in may . in september , tnt acquired the us cable broadcast rights to five marvel studios films, beginning with avengers age of ultron, for broadcast two years after their theatrical release.every marvel studios release from january  to december  was available on netflix. captain marvel was the first walt disney studios motion picturesdistributed film not to stream on netflix, after disney let their licensing deal with them expire. it became the first theatrical disney release to stream exclusively on disney, which launched on november , . bloomberg news reported that the films part of disneys agreement with netflix would return to netflix starting in , while being removed from disney.in april , sony signed a deal with disney for its theatrical releases from  to  to stream on disney and hulu and appear on disneys linear television networks for their pay  window. as well, sonys legacy content, including past spiderman films and marvel content in sonys spiderman universe , would be able to be streamed on disney and hulu. disneys access to sonys titles would come following their availability on netflix for their pay  window. homecoming and spiderman far from home  had previously been available on starz and fx. homecoming became available on disney in the united states on may , . the incredible hulk became available on disney in the united states on june , , following the films distribution rights reverting to marvel studios.

from august  to september , , in conjunction with marvel studios year anniversary celebrations, all  films released at the time  were screened in imax. the films were shown in release order, with four films per day. the final days of the festival were themerelated, with one showing origin films , one showing teamups , and the final day showing iron man and the avengers as chosen by the fans via a twitter poll. the festival also saw iron man, the incredible hulk, and captain america the first avenger released in imax for the first time.

the marvel cinematic universe is the highestgrossing film franchise of all time worldwide, both unadjusted and adjustedforinflation, having grossed over . billion at the global box office. several of its subseries such as the avengers, iron man, captain america, thor and spiderman film series are among the most successful film series of all time. from july  to march , avengers endgame was the highestgrossing film of all time.

the films of the marvel cinematic universe have been nominated for numerous awards, including  academy awards, of which it won four.

these projects were in development as films from marvel studios before becoming television series under marvel television

runaways a film based on the runaways went through a number of iterations. brian k. vaughan was originally hired to write a screenplay based on the property in may . in april , marvel hired peter sollett to direct the film, and drew pearce was hired to write a script in may. in october , development on the film was put on hold, with vaughan later noting marvel studios had decided to focus their efforts on a guardians of the galaxy film instead. pearce revealed in september  that the runaways film had been shelved in favor of the avengers, with the earliest it could release being phase three. in october , after announcing all of marvels phase three films without runaways, feige stated the project was still an awesome script that exists in our script vault, adding, wed love to do something with runaways some day. in our television and future film discussions, its always one that we talk about, because we have a solid draft there. but again, we cant make them all. in august , marvel television announced marvels runaways from the streaming service hulu, with the series receiving a full season order in may . it premiered in november . hulu announced in november  that the third season of runaways would be its last.

inhumans in april , feige mentioned the inhumans as a property out of which he was confident a film would be made. inhumans as a concept would first be introduced to the mcu in  through the second season of the television series agents of s.h.i.e.l.d. by august , the studio was ready to move forward in development with the film, with a screenplay written by joe robert cole. in october , the film was announced for phase three and scheduled for release july . by october , cole was no longer involved with the film and any potential drafts that he may have written would not be used. in april , inhumans was removed from the release schedule, and would no longer be a part of phase three. in july , feige said inhumans would certainly be a part of the discussion regarding the film ideas for  and , adding the following november that he was still optimistic the film could be released in phase four. in november , marvel television announced the series marvels inhumans, which premiered on abc in september , after the first two episodes were screened in imax. the series was not intended to be a reworking of the film. abc canceled inhumans after one season in may .

following marvel studios and sony pictures september  agreement, feige noted that as sony continued to separately build their own shared universe, sonys spiderman universe , it was possible the mcu version of spiderman could appear in that universe. this interaction was said to be a call and answer between the two franchises as they acknowledge details between the two in what ... would loosely be described as a shared detailed universe. in may , adam b. vary of variety called the connections between the two universes perplexing, specifically because if holland were to appear in an ssu film it would retroactively make any previous ssu films part of the mcu, and because a teaser trailer for the ssu film morbius  had featured michael keaton, who previously played adrian toomes / vulture in spiderman homecoming. sony pictures group president sanford panitch acknowledged this confusion and said there was a plan to clarify the relationship between the two universes. he believed it was already getting a little more clear for people as to where were headed at that time and added that the release of spiderman no way home in december  would reveal more of this plan. vary commented that the apparent introduction of multiverse elements in no way home could be what would allow holland to appear in both the mcu and the ssu. the following month, feige said he would not rule anything out completely in terms of additional sonycontrolled characters appearing in marvel studios films.in no way home, stephen strange casts two spells one that brings characters from other universes into the mcu and one that sends them back to their own universes. these characters, as depicted in the film, are tobey maguire and andrew garfield returning as their versions of spiderman from sam raimis spiderman trilogy and marc webbs the amazing spiderman films, respectively, alongside willem dafoe as norman osborn / green goblin, alfred molina as otto octavius / doctor octopus, and thomas haden church as flint marko / sandman from the raimi films, as well as rhys ifans as curt connors / lizard and jamie foxx as max dillon / electro from the webb films. the midcredits scene of the ssu film venom let there be carnage  shows eddie brock and venom  being transported into the mcu from their universe by the first spell and the midcredits scene of no way home shows them being transported back to their own universe by the second spell. a small part of the venom symbiote is left in the mcu. feige said there was a lot of coordination between the let there be carnage and no way home teams to create the two scenes, with no way home director jon watts directing both scenes during production of that film. the midcredits scenes of morbius revealed that toomes was accidentally transported from the mcu to the ssu following stranges second spell. the events of no way home are referenced in the animated film spiderman across the spiderverse , while also referring to the mcu as earth.

diana, princess of wales , was a member of the british royal family. she was the first wife of charles iii  and mother of princes william and harry. her activism and glamour made her an international icon, and earned her enduring popularity.

diana was born into british nobility, and grew up close to the royal family on their sandringham estate. in , while working as a nursery teachers assistant, she became engaged to charles, the eldest son of elizabeth ii. their wedding took place at st pauls cathedral in july  and made her princess of wales, a role in which she was enthusiastically received by the public. the couple had two sons, william and harry, who were then respectively second and third in the line of succession to the british throne. dianas marriage to charles suffered due to their incompatibility and extramarital affairs. they separated in , soon after the breakdown of their relationship became public knowledge. their marital difficulties were widely publicised, and the couple divorced in .

as princess of wales, diana undertook royal duties on behalf of the queen and represented her at functions across the commonwealth realms. she was celebrated in the media for her unconventional approach to charity work. her patronages were initially centred on children and the elderly, but she later became known for her involvement in two particular campaigns one involved the social attitudes towards and the acceptance of aids patients, and the other for the removal of landmines, promoted through the international red cross. she also raised awareness and advocated for ways to help people affected by cancer and mental illness. diana was initially noted for her shyness, but her charisma and friendliness endeared her to the public and helped her reputation survive the public collapse of her marriage. considered photogenic, she was a leader of fashion in the s and s.

in august , diana died in a car crash in paris; the incident led to extensive public mourning and global media attention. an inquest returned a verdict of unlawful killing following operation paget, an investigation by the metropolitan police. her legacy has had a deep impact on the royal family and british society.

diana frances spencer was born on  july , the fourth of five children of john spencer, viscount althorp , and frances spencer, viscountess althorp . she was delivered at park house, sandringham, norfolk. the spencer family had been closely allied with the british royal family for several generations; her grandmothers, cynthia spencer, countess spencer, and ruth roche, baroness fermoy, had served as ladiesinwaiting to the queen mother. her parents were hoping for a boy to carry on the family line, and no name was chosen for a week until they settled on diana frances after her mother and lady diana spencer, a manytimesgreataunt who was also a prospective princess of wales as a potential bride for george iis eldest son and heir, frederick. within the family, she was also known informally as duch, a reference to her duchesslike attitude in childhood.on  august , diana was baptised at st. mary magdalene church, sandringham. she grew up with three siblings sarah, jane, and charles. her infant brother, john, died shortly after his birth one year before diana was born. the desire for an heir added strain to her parents marriage, and lady althorp was sent to harley street clinics in london to determine the cause of the problem. the experience was described as humiliating by dianas younger brother, charles it was a dreadful time for my parents and probably the root of their divorce because i dont think they ever got over it. diana grew up in park house, situated on the sandringham estate. the family leased the house from its owner, queen elizabeth ii, whom diana called aunt lilibet since childhood. the royal family frequently holidayed at the neighbouring sandringham house, and diana played with the queens sons  princes andrew and edward.

diana was seven years old when her parents divorced. her mother later began a relationship with peter shand kydd and married him in . diana lived with her mother in london during her parents separation in , but during that years christmas holidays, lord althorp refused to let his daughter return to london with lady althorp. shortly afterwards, he won custody of diana with support from his former motherinlaw, lady fermoy. in , lord althorp married raine, countess of dartmouth. dianas relationship with her stepmother was particularly bad. she resented raine, whom she called a bully. on one occasion diana pushed her down the stairs. she later described her childhood as very unhappy and very unstable, the whole thing. she became known as lady diana after her father later inherited the title of earl spencer in , at which point her father moved the entire family from park house to althorp, the spencer seat in northamptonshire.

diana was initially homeschooled under the supervision of her governess, gertrude allen. she began her formal education at silfield private school in kings lynn, norfolk, and moved to riddlesworth hall school, an allgirls boarding school near thetford, when she was nine. she joined her sisters at west heath girls school in sevenoaks, kent, in . she did not perform well academically, failing her olevels twice. her outstanding community spirit was recognised with an award from west heath. she left west heath when she was sixteen. her brother charles recalls her as being quite shy up until that time. she demonstrated musical ability as a skilled pianist. she also excelled in swimming and diving, and studied ballet and tap dance.

in , diana worked for three months as a nanny for philippa and jeremy whitaker in hampshire. after attending institut alpin videmanette  for one term, and leaving after the easter term of , diana returned to london, where she shared her mothers flat with two school friends. in london, she took an advanced cooking course and worked at a series of lowpaying jobs; she worked as a dance instructor for youth until a skiing accident caused her to miss three months of work. she then found employment as a playgroup preschool assistant, did some cleaning work for her sister sarah and several of her friends, and acted as a hostess at parties. she spent time working as a nanny for the robertsons, an american family living in london, and worked as a nursery teachers assistant at the young england school in pimlico. in july , her mother bought her a flat at coleherne court in earls court as an th birthday present. she lived there with three flatmates until  february .

diana first met the prince of wales, the queens eldest son and heir apparent, when she was  in november . he was then  and dating her older sister, sarah. charles and diana were guests at a country weekend during the summer of  and he took a serious interest in her as a potential bride. the relationship progressed when he invited her aboard the royal yacht britannia for a sailing weekend to cowes. this was followed by an invitation to balmoral castle  to meet his family. she was well received by the queen, the queen mother and the duke of edinburgh. charles subsequently courted diana in london. he proposed on  february  at windsor castle, and she accepted, but their engagement was kept secret for two and a half weeks.

their engagement became official on  february . diana selected her own engagement ring. following the engagement, she left her occupation as a nursery teachers assistant and temporarily lived at the queen mothers residence, clarence house. she subsequently resided at buckingham palace until the wedding, where, according to the biographer ingrid seward, her life was incredibly lonely. diana was the first englishwoman to marry the first in line to the throne since anne hyde married james, duke of york and albany , over  years earlier, and she was also the first royal bride to have a paying job before her engagement. dianas first public appearance with prince charles was at a charity ball held at goldsmiths hall in march , where she was introduced to princess grace of monaco.twentyyearold diana became the princess of wales when she married charles on  july . the wedding was held at st pauls cathedral, which offered more seating than westminster abbey, a church that was generally used for royal weddings. the service was widely described as a fairytale wedding and was watched by a global television audience of  million people while , spectators lined the streets to catch a glimpse of the couple en route to the ceremony. at the altar, diana inadvertently reversed the order of his first two names, saying philip charles arthur george instead. she did not say she would obey him; that traditional vow was left out at the couples request, which caused some comment at the time. diana wore a dress valued at ,  with a foot  train. within a few years of the wedding, the queen extended diana visible tokens of membership in the royal family; she lent her the queen marys lovers knot tiara, and granted her the badge of the royal family order of elizabeth ii.

the couple had residences at kensington palace and highgrove house, near tetbury. on  november , dianas pregnancy was announced. in january  weeks into the pregnancydiana fell down a staircase at sandringham, suffering some bruising, and the royal gynaecologist george pinker was summoned from london; the foetus was uninjured. diana later confessed that she had intentionally thrown herself down the stairs because she was feeling so inadequate. on  june , diana gave birth to the couples first son, prince william. she subsequently suffered from postpartum depression after her first pregnancy. amidst some media criticism, she decided to take williamwho was still a babyon her first major tours of australia and new zealand, and the decision was popularly applauded. by her own admission, diana had not initially intended to take william until malcolm fraser, the australian prime minister, made the suggestion.a second son, harry, was born on  september . diana said she and charles were closest during her pregnancy with harry. she was aware their second child was a boy, but did not share the knowledge with anyone else, including charles as he was hoping for a girl.diana gave her sons wider experiences than was usual for royal children. she rarely deferred to charles or to the royal family, and was often intransigent when it came to the children. she chose their first given names, dismissed a royal family nanny and engaged one of her own choosing, selected their schools and clothing, planned their outings, and took them to school herself as often as her schedule permitted. she also organised her public duties around their timetables. diana was reported to have described harry as naughty, just like me, and william as my little wise old man whom she started to rely on as her confidant by his early teens.

five years into the marriage, the couples incompatibility and age difference of twelve years became visible and damaging. in  diana began a relationship with james hewitt, the familys former riding instructor and in the same year, charles resumed his relationship with his former girlfriend camilla parker bowles. the media speculated that hewitt, not charles, was harrys father based on the alleged physical similarity between hewitt and harry, but hewitt and others have denied this. harry was born two years before hewitt and diana began their affair.by  cracks in the marriage had become visible and the couples unhappiness and cold attitude towards one another were being reported by the press, who dubbed them the glums because of their evident discomfort in each others company. in  diana was at a birthday party for parker bowless sister, annabel elliot, when she confronted parker bowles about her and charless extramarital affair. these affairs were later exposed in  with the publication of andrew mortons book, diana her true story. the book, which also revealed dianas allegedly suicidal unhappiness, caused a media storm. in , james colthurst conducted secret interviews with diana in which she had talked about her marital issues and difficulties. these recordings were later used as a source for mortons book. during her lifetime, both diana and morton denied her direct involvement in the writing process and maintained that family and friends were the books main source, however, after her death morton acknowledged dianas role in writing the tellall in the books updated edition, diana her true story in her own words.the queen and prince philip hosted a meeting between charles and diana and unsuccessfully tried to effect a reconciliation. philip wrote to diana and expressed his disappointment at the extramarital affairs of both her and charles; he asked her to examine their behaviour from the others point of view. diana reportedly found the letters difficult, but nevertheless appreciated that he was acting with good intent. it was alleged by some people, including dianas close friend simone simmons, that diana and philip had a tense relationship; however, other observers said their letters provided no sign of friction between them. philip later issued a statement, publicly denying the allegations of him insulting diana.during  and , leaked tapes of telephone conversations reflected negatively on both charles and diana. tape recordings of diana and james gilbey were made public in august , and transcripts were published the same month. the article, squidgygate, was followed in november  by the leaked camillagate tapes, intimate exchanges between charles and parker bowles, published in the tabloids. in december , the prime minister, john major, announced the couples amicable separation to the house of commons.

between  and , diana hired a voice coach, peter settelen, to help her develop her public speaking voice. in a videotape recorded by settelen in , diana said that in  through to , she had been deeply in love with someone who worked in this environment. it is thought she was referring to barry mannakee, who was transferred to the diplomatic protection squad in  after his managers had determined that his relationship with diana had been inappropriate. diana said in the tape that mannakee had been chucked out from his role as her bodyguard following suspicion that the two were having an affair. penny junor suggested in her  book that diana was in a romantic relationship with mannakee. dianas friends dismissed the claim as absurd. in the subsequently released tapes, diana said she had feelings for that someone, saying i was quite happy to give all this up and just to go off and live with him. she described him as the greatest friend shes ever had, though she denied any sexual relationship with him. she also spoke bitterly of her husband saying that he made me feel so inadequate in every possible way, that each time i came up for air he pushed me down again.although she blamed parker bowles for her marital troubles, diana began to believe her husband had been involved in other affairs. in october  diana wrote to her butler paul burrell, telling him that she believed her husband was now in love with his personal assistant tiggy leggebourkewho was also his sons former nannyand was planning to have her killed to make the path clear for him to marry tiggy. leggebourke had been hired by charles as a young companion for his sons while they were in his care, and diana was resentful of leggebourke and her relationship with the young princes. charles sought public understanding via a televised interview with jonathan dimbleby on  june . in the interview, he said he had rekindled his relationship with parker bowles in  only after his marriage to diana had irretrievably broken down. in the same year, dianas affair with hewitt was exposed in detail in the book princess in love by anna pasternak, with hewitt acting as the main source. diana was evidently disturbed and outraged when the book was released, although pasternak claimed hewitt had acted with dianas support to avoid having the affair covered in andrew mortons second book. in the same year, the news of the world claimed that diana had had an affair with the married art dealer oliver hoare. according to hoares obituary, there was little doubt she had been in a relationship with him. however, diana denied any romantic relationship with hoare, whom she described as a friend. she was also linked by the press to the rugby union player will carling and private equity investor theodore j. forstmann, yet these claims were neither confirmed nor proven.

the journalist martin bashir interviewed diana for the bbc current affairs show panorama. the interview was broadcast on  november . diana discussed her own and her husbands extramarital affairs. referring to charless relationship with parker bowles, she said well, there were three of us in this marriage, so it was a bit crowded. she also expressed doubt about her husbands suitability for kingship. the authors tina brown, sally bedell smith, and sarah bradford support dianas admission in the interview that she had suffered from depression, bulimia and had engaged numerous times in the act of self harm; the shows transcript records diana confirming many of her mental health problems. the combination of illnesses from which diana herself said she suffered resulted in some of her biographers opining that she had borderline personality disorder. it was later revealed that bashir had used forged bank statements to win diana and her brothers trust to secure the interview, falsely indicating people close to her had been paid for spying. lord dyson conducted an independent inquiry into the issue and concluded that bashir had little difficulty in playing on dianas fears and paranoia, a sentiment that was shared by dianas son william.the interview proved to be the tipping point. on  december, buckingham palace announced that the queen had sent letters to charles and diana, advising them to divorce. the queens move was backed by the prime minister and by senior privy counsellors, and, according to the bbc, was decided after two weeks of talks. charles formally agreed to the divorce in a written statement soon after. in february , diana announced her agreement after negotiations with charles and representatives of the queen, irritating buckingham palace by issuing her own announcement of the divorce agreement and its terms. in july , the couple agreed on the terms of their divorce. this followed shortly after dianas accusation that charless personal assistant tiggy leggebourke had aborted his child, after which leggebourke instructed her solicitor peter carterruck to demand an apology. dianas private secretary patrick jephson resigned shortly before the story broke, later writing that she had exulted in accusing leggebourke of having had an abortion. the rumours of leggebourkes alleged abortion were apparently spread by martin bashir as a means to gain his panorama interview with diana.the decree nisi was granted on  july  and the divorce was finalised on  august . diana was represented by anthony julius in the case. the couple shared custody of their children. she received a lump sum settlement of  million  as well as , per year. the couple signed a confidentiality agreement that prohibited them from discussing the details of the divorce or of their married life. days before, letters patent were issued with general rules to regulate royal titles after divorce. diana lost the style her royal highness and instead was styled diana, princess of wales. as the mother of the prince expected to one day ascend to the throne, she was still considered to be a member of the royal family and was accorded the same precedence she enjoyed during her marriage. the queen reportedly wanted to let diana continue to use the style of royal highness after her divorce, but charles had insisted on removing it. prince william was reported to have reassured his mother dont worry, mummy, i will give it back to you one day when i am king. almost a year before, according to tina brown, philip had warned diana if you dont behave, my girl, well take your title away. she is said to have replied my title is a lot older than yours, philip.

after her  divorce, diana retained the double apartment on the north side of kensington palace that she had shared with charles since the first year of their marriage; the apartment remained her home until her death the following year. she also moved her offices to kensington palace but was permitted to use the state apartments at st jamess palace. in a book published in , paul burrell claimed dianas private letters had revealed that her brother, lord spencer, had refused to allow her to live at althorp, despite her request. the allegations were proven to be untrue as spencer received legal apologies from different newspapers, including the times in , which admitted that having considered his sisters safety, and in line with police advice, the earl offered the princess of wales a number of properties included wormleighton manor, the spencer familys original ancestral home. however, he could not offer garden house cottage on the althorp estate to diana as the home was intended for a member of staff.diana was also given an allowance to run her private office, which was responsible for her charity work and royal duties, but from september  onwards she was required to pay her bills and any expenditure incurred by her or on her behalf. furthermore, she continued to have access to the jewellery that she had received during her marriage, and was allowed to use the air transport of the british royal family and government. diana was also offered security by metropolitan polices royalty protection group, which she benefitted from while travelling with her sons, but had refused it in the final years of her life, in an attempt to distance herself from the royal family. after her death, it was revealed that diana had been in discussion with majors successor, tony blair, about a special role that would provide a government platform for her campaigns and charities to make her capable of endorsing britains interests overseas.diana retained close friendships with several celebrities, including elton john, freddie mercury, liza minnelli, george michael, michael jackson, and gianni versace, whose funeral she attended in . she dated the britishpakistani heart surgeon hasnat khan, who was called the love of her life by many of her closest friends after her death, and she is said to have described him as mr. wonderful. in may , diana visited lahore upon invitation of imran khan, a relative of hasnat khan, and visited the latters family in secret. khan was intensely private and the relationship was conducted in secrecy, with diana lying to members of the press who questioned her about it. their relationship lasted almost two years with differing accounts of who ended it. she is said to have spoken of her distress when he ended their relationship. however, according to khans testimony at the inquest into her death, it was diana who ended their relationship in the summer of . burrell also said the relationship was ended by diana in july . burrell also claimed that dianas mother, frances shand kydd, disapproved of her daughters relationship with a muslim man. by the time of dianas death in , she had not spoken to her mother in four months. by contrast, her relationship with her estranged stepmother had reportedly improved.within a month, diana began a relationship with dodi fayed, the son of her summer host, mohamed alfayed. that summer, diana had considered taking her sons on a holiday to the hamptons on long island, new york, but security officials had prevented it. after deciding against a trip to thailand, she accepted fayeds invitation to join his family in the south of france, where his compound and large security detail would not cause concern to the royal protection squad. mohamed alfayed bought the jonikal, a metre multimillionpound yacht on which to entertain diana and her sons. tina brown later claimed that dianas romance with fayed and her fourmonth relationship with gulu lalvani were a ploy to inflame the true object of her affections, hasnat khan. in the years after her death, burrell, journalist richard kay, and voice coach stewart pierce have claimed that diana was also thinking about buying a property in the united states.

following her engagement to charles, diana made her first official public appearance in march  in a charity event at goldsmiths hall. she attended the trooping the colour for the first time in june , making her appearance on the balcony of buckingham palace afterwards. in october , charles and diana visited wales. she attended the state opening of parliament for the first time on  november . her first solo engagement was a visit to regent street on  november  to switch on the christmas lights. diana made her inaugural overseas tour in september , to attend the state funeral of princess grace of monaco. also in , diana was created a grand cross of the order of the crown by queen beatrix. in , she accompanied charles on a tour of australia and new zealand with prince william. the tour was a success and the couple drew immense crowds, though the press focused more on diana rather than charles, coining the term dianamania as a reference to peoples obsession with her. while sitting in a car with charles near the sydney opera house, diana burst into tears for a few minutes, which their office stated was due to jet lag and the heat. in new zealand, the couple met with representatives of the mori people. their visit to canada in june and july  included a trip to edmonton to open the  summer universiade and a stop in newfoundland to commemorate the th anniversary of that islands acquisition by the crown. in , she was targeted by the scottish national liberation army who tried to deliver a letter bomb to her.

in february , diana was the patron of london city ballet when she travelled to norway on her own to attend a performance organised by the company. in april , charles and diana visited italy, and were later joined by princes william and harry. they met with president alessandro pertini. their visit to the holy see included a private audience with pope john paul ii. in autumn , they returned to australia, and their tour was well received by the public and the media, who referred to diana as diamond princess and the jewel in the crown. in november , the couple visited the united states, meeting the president, ronald reagan, and the first lady, nancy reagan, at the white house. diana had a busy year in  as she and charles toured japan, spain, and canada. in canada, they visited expo , where diana fainted in the california pavilion. in november , she went on a sixday tour to oman, qatar, bahrain and saudi arabia, where she met king fahd and sultan qaboos bin said al said.in , charles and diana visited thailand and toured australia for the bicentenary celebrations. in february , she spent a few days in new york as a solo visit, mainly to promote the works of the welsh national opera, of which she was a patron. during a tour of harlem hospital center, she spontaneously hugged a sevenyearold child with aids. in march , she had her second trip to the arab states of the persian gulf, in which she visited kuwait and the uae.

in march , diana and charles toured nigeria and cameroon. the president of cameroon hosted an official dinner to welcome them in yaound. highlights of the tour included visits by diana to hospitals and projects focusing on womens development. in may , they visited hungary for four days. it was the first visit by members of the royal family to a former warsaw pact country. they attended a dinner hosted by president rpd gncz and viewed a fashion display at the museum of applied arts in budapest. peto institute was among the places visited by diana, and she presented its director with an honorary obe. in november , the royal couple went to japan to attend the enthronement of emperor akihito.in her desire to play an encouraging role during the gulf war, diana visited germany in december  to meet with the families of soldiers. she subsequently travelled to germany in january  to visit raf bruggen, and later wrote an encouraging letter which was published in soldier, navy news and raf news. in , charles and diana visited queens university in kingston, ontario, where they presented the university with a replica of their royal charter. in september , diana visited pakistan on a solo trip, and went to brazil with charles. during the brazilian tour, diana paid visits to organisations that battled homelessness among street children. her final trips with charles were to india and south korea in . she visited mother teresas hospice in kolkata, india. the two women met later in the same month in rome and developed a personal relationship. it was also during the indian tour that pictures of diana alone in front of the taj mahal made headlines. in may , she went on a solo tour of egypt, visiting the giza pyramid complex and attending a meeting with egyptian president hosni mubarak. in november , she went on an official solo trip to france and had an audience with president franois mitterrand.

in march , she went on her first solo trip after her separation from charles, visiting a leprosy hospital in nepal where she met and came into contact with some patients, marking the first time they had ever been touched by a dignitary who had come to visit. in december , she announced that she would withdraw from public life, but in november  she said she wished to make a partial return. in her capacity as the vicepresident of british red cross, she was interested in playing an important role for its th anniversary celebrations. later, the queen formally invited her to attend the anniversary celebrations of dday. in february , diana visited japan. she paid a formal visit to emperor akihito and empress michiko, and visited the national childrens hospital in tokyo. in june , diana went to the venice biennale art festival, and also visited moscow where she received the international leonardo prize. in november , diana undertook a fourday trip to argentina to attend a charity event. she visited many other countries, including belgium, switzerland, and zimbabwe, alongside numerous others. during her separation from charles, which lasted for almost four years, diana participated in major national occasions as a senior member of the royal family, notably including the commemorations of the th anniversaries of victory in europe day and victory over japan day in .

in , she confided to the premier of newfoundland, brian peckford, i am finding it very difficult to cope with the pressures of being princess of wales, but i am learning to cope with it. she was expected to make regular public appearances at hospitals, schools, and other facilities, in the thcentury model of royal patronage. from the mids, she became increasingly associated with numerous charities. she carried out  official engagements in  and  in . diana developed an intense interest in serious illnesses and healthrelated matters outside the purview of traditional royal involvement, including aids and leprosy. in recognition of her effect as a philanthropist, stephen lee, director of the uk institute of charity fundraising managers, said her overall effect on charity is probably more significant than any other persons in the th century.

she was the patroness of charities and organisations who worked with the homeless, youth, drug addicts, and the elderly. from , she was president of great ormond street hospital for children. she was patron of the natural history museum and president of the royal academy of music and the royal academy of dramatic art. from  to , she was president of barnardos, a charity founded by dr. thomas john barnardo in  to care for vulnerable children and young people. in , she became patron of the british red cross and supported its organisations in other countries such as australia and canada. she made several lengthy visits each week to royal brompton hospital, where she worked to comfort seriously ill or dying patients. from  to , she was a patron of headway, a brain injury association. in , she became the first patron of chester childbirth appeal, a charity she had supported since . the charity, which is named after one of dianas royal titles, could raise over  million with her help. in , she helped her friend julia samuel launch the charity child bereavement uk which supports children of military families, those of suicide victims, and terminallyill parents, and became its patron. william later replaced his mother as the charitys royal patron.in , diana was awarded the honorary freedom of the city of london, the highest honour which is in the power of the city of london to bestow on someone. in june , she travelled to moscow. she paid a visit to a childrens hospital she had previously supported when she provided them with medical equipment. in december , diana received the united cerebral palsy humanitarian of the year award in new york city for her philanthropic efforts. in october , for her works on the elderly, she was awarded a gold medal at a health care conference organised by the pio manz centre in rimini, italy.the day after her divorce, she announced her resignation from over  charities and retained patronages of only six centrepoint, english national ballet, great ormond street hospital, the leprosy mission, national aids trust, and the royal marsden hospital. she continued her work with the british red cross antipersonnel land mines campaign, but was no longer listed as patron.in may , diana opened the richard attenborough centre for disability and the arts in leicester, after being asked by her friend richard attenborough. in june  and at the suggestion of her son william, some of her dresses and suits were sold at christies auction houses in london and new york, and the proceeds that were earned from these events were donated to charities. her final official engagement was a visit to northwick park hospital, london, on  july . her th and final birthday celebration was held at tate gallery, which was also a commemorative event for the gallerys th anniversary. she was scheduled to attend a fundraiser at the osteopathic centre for children on  september , upon her return from paris.

diana began her work with aids patients in the s. she was not averse to making physical contact with aids patients, and was the first british royal to do so. in , she held hands with an aids patient in one of her early efforts to destigmatise the condition. diana noted hiv does not make people dangerous to know. you can shake their hands and give them a hug. heaven knows they need it. whats more, you can share their homes, their workplaces, and their playgrounds and toys. to dianas disappointment, the queen did not support this type of charity work, suggesting she get involved in something more pleasant. in july , she opened landmark aids centre in south london. in october , diana opened grandmas house, a home for young aids patients in washington, dc. she was also a patron of the national aids trust and regularly visited london lighthouse, which provided residential care for hiv patients . in , she hugged one patient during a visit to the aids ward of the middlesex hospital, which she had opened in  as the first hospital unit dedicated to this cause in the uk. as the patron of turning point, a health and social care organisation, diana visited its project in london for people with hiv/aids in . she later established and led fundraising campaigns for aids research.in march , diana visited south africa, where she met with the president, nelson mandela. on  november , mandela announced that the nelson mandela childrens fund would be teaming up with the diana, princess of wales memorial fund to help people with aids. they had planned the combination of the two charities a few months before her death. mandela later praised diana for her efforts surrounding the issue of hiv/aids when she stroked the limbs of someone with leprosy or sat on the bed of a man with hiv/aids and held his hand, she transformed public attitudes and improved the life chances of such people. diana had used her celebrity status to fight stigma attached to people living with hiv/aids, mandela said.

diana was patron of the halo trust, an organisation that removes debrisparticularly landminesleft behind by war. in january , pictures of diana touring an angolan minefield in a ballistic helmet and flak jacket were seen worldwide. during her campaign, she was accused of meddling in politics and called a loose cannon by earl howe, an official in the british ministry of defence. despite the criticism, halo states that dianas efforts resulted in raising international awareness about landmines and the subsequent sufferings caused by them. in june , she gave a speech at a landmines conference held at the royal geographical society, and went to washington, dc to support the american red crosss antilandmine initiative. from  to  august , just days before her death, she visited bosnia and herzegovina with jerry white and ken rutherford of the landmine survivors network.

her work on the landmines issue has been described as influential in the signing of the ottawa treaty, which created an international ban on the use of antipersonnel landmines. introducing the second reading of the landmines bill  to the british house of commons, the foreign secretary, robin cook, paid tribute to dianas work on landminesall honourable members will be aware from their postbags of the immense contribution made by diana, princess of wales to bringing home to many of our constituents the human costs of landmines. the best way in which to record our appreciation of her work, and the work of ngos that have campaigned against landmines, is to pass the bill, and to pave the way towards a global ban on landmines.

a few months after dianas death in , the international campaign to ban landmines won the nobel peace prize.

for her first solo official trip, diana visited the royal marsden nhs foundation trust, a cancer treatment hospital in london. she later chose this charity to be among the organisations that benefited from the auction of her clothes in new york. the trusts communications manager said she did much to remove the stigma and taboo associated with diseases such as cancer, aids, hiv and leprosy. diana became president of the hospital on  june . the wolfson childrens cancer unit was opened by diana on  february . in february , diana, who had been informed about a newly opened cancer hospital built by imran khan, travelled to pakistan to visit its childrens cancer wards and attend a fundraising dinner in aid of the charity in lahore. she later visited the hospital again in may . in june , she travelled to chicago in her capacity as president of the royal marsden hospital in order to attend a fundraising event at the field museum of natural history and raised more than  million for cancer research. she additionally visited patients at the cook county hospital and delivered remarks at a conference on breast cancer at the northwestern university chicago campus after meeting a group of breast cancer researchers. in september , after being asked by katharine graham, diana went to washington and appeared at a white house breakfast in respect of the nina hyde center for breast cancer research. she also attended an annual fundraiser for breast cancer research organised by the washington post at the same centre.in , diana opened children with leukaemia  in memory of two young cancer victims. in november , a few days after the death of jean ogorman from cancer, diana met her family. the deaths of jean and her brother affected her and she assisted their family to establish the charity. it was opened by her on  january  at mill hill secondary school, and she supported it until her death in .

in november , diana visited a leprosy hospital in indonesia. following her visit, she became patron of the leprosy mission, an organisation dedicated to providing medicine, treatment, and other support services to those who are afflicted with the disease. she remained the patron of this charity and visited several of its hospitals around the world, especially in india, nepal, zimbabwe and nigeria until her death in . she touched those affected by the disease when many people believed it could be contracted through casual contact. it has always been my concern to touch people with leprosy, trying to show in a simple action that they are not reviled, nor are we repulsed, she commented. the diana princess of wales health education and media centre in noida, india, was opened in her honour in november , funded by the diana princess of wales memorial fund to give social support to the people affected by leprosy and disability.diana was a longstanding and active supporter of centrepoint, a charity which provides accommodation and support to homeless people, and became patron in . she supported organisations that battle poverty and homelessness, including the passage. diana was a supporter of young homeless people and spoke out on behalf of them by saying that they deserve a decent start in life. we, as a part of society, must ensure that young peoplewho are our futureare given the chance they deserve, she said. diana used to take young william and harry for private visits to centrepoint services and homeless shelters. the young people at centrepoint were always really touched by her visits and by her genuine feelings for them, said one of the charitys staff members. prince william later became the patron of this charity.

diana was a staunch and longtime supporter of charities and organisations that focused on social and mental issues, including relate and turning point. relate was relaunched in  as a renewed version to its predecessor, the national marriage guidance council. diana became its patron in . turning point, a health and social care organisation, was founded in  to help and support those affected by drug and alcohol misuse and mental health problems. she became the charitys patron in  and visited the charity on a regular basis, meeting the sufferers at its centres or institutions including rampton and broadmoor. in  during a speech for turning point she said, it takes professionalism to convince a doubting public that it should accept back into its midst many of those diagnosed as psychotics, neurotics and other sufferers who victorian communities decided should be kept out of sight in the safety of mental institutions. despite the protocol problems of travelling to a muslim country, she made a trip to pakistan in  in order to visit a rehabilitation centre in lahore as a sign of her commitment to working against drug abuse.

in november , the sunday mirror ran a story claiming that charles had used the royal train twice for secret love rendezvous with diana, prompting the palace to issue a statement, calling the story a total fabrication and demanding an apology. the newspaper editors, however, insisted that the woman boarding the train was diana and declined to apologise. in february , pictures of a pregnant diana in bikini while holidaying were published in the media. the queen subsequently released a statement and called it the blackest day in the history of british journalism.in , mirror group newspapers  published photographs of diana that were taken by gym owner bryce taylor. the photos showed her exercising in the gym la fitness wearing a leotard and cycling shorts. diana lawyers immediately filed a criminal complaint that sought a permanent ban on the sale and publication of the photographs around the world. however, some newspapers outside the uk published the pictures. the courts granted an injunction against taylor and mgn that prohibited further publication of the pictures. mgn later issued an apology after facing much criticism from the public and gave diana  million as a payment for her legal costs, while donating , to her charities. la fitness issued its own apology in june , which was followed by taylor apologising in february  and giving up the , he had made from the sale of pictures in an outofcourt settlement about a week before the case was set to start. it was alleged that a member of the royal family had helped him financially to settle out of court.in , pictures of diana sunbathing topless at a costa del sol hotel were put up for sale by a spanish photography agency for a price of  million. in , a set of pictures of a topless diana while sunbathing appeared in the mirror, which resulted in a furor about invasion of privacy. in the same year, she was the subject of a hoax call by victor lewissmith, who pretended to be stephen hawking, though the full recorded conversation was never released. also in , stuart higgins of the sun wrote a frontpage story about an intimate video purporting to feature diana with james hewitt. the video turned out to be a hoax, forcing higgins to issue an apology.

on  august , diana died in a car crash in the pont de lalma tunnel in paris while her driver was fleeing the paparazzi. the crash also resulted in the deaths of her companion dodi fayed and their driver, henri paul, who was also the acting security manager of htel ritz paris. trevor reesjones, who was employed as a bodyguard by dodis father, survived the crash, suffering a serious head injury. the televised funeral, on  september, was watched by a british television audience that peaked at . million, which was one of the united kingdoms highest viewing figures ever. millions more watched the event around the world.

the sudden and unexpected death of an extraordinarily popular royal figure brought statements from senior figures worldwide and many tributes by members of the public. people left flowers, candles, cards, and personal messages outside kensington palace for many months. her coffin, draped with the royal flag, was brought to london from paris by charles and dianas two sisters on  august . the coffin was taken to a private mortuary and then placed in the chapel royal, st jamess palace.

on  september, queen elizabeth ii paid tribute to her in a live television broadcast. dianas funeral took place in westminster abbey on  september. her sons walked in the funeral procession behind her coffin, along with the prince of wales, the duke of edinburgh, dianas brother lord spencer, and representatives of some of her charities. lord spencer said of his sister, she proved in the last year that she needed no royal title to continue to generate her particular brand of magic. rewritten in tribute to diana, candle in the wind  was performed by elton john at the funeral service . released as a single in , the global proceeds from the song have gone to dianas charities.

the burial took place privately later the same day. dianas former husband, sons, mother, siblings, a close friend, and a clergyman were present. dianas body was clothed in a black longsleeved dress designed by catherine walker, which she had chosen some weeks before. a set of rosary beads that she had received from mother teresa was placed in her hands. dianas grave is on an island within the grounds of althorp park, the spencer family home for centuries.the burial party was provided by the nd battalion the princess of waless royal regiment, who carried dianas coffin across to the island and laid her to rest. diana was the regiments colonelinchief from  to . the original plan was for diana to be buried in the spencer family vault at the local church in nearby great brington, but lord spencer said he was concerned about public safety and security and the onslaught of visitors that might overwhelm great brington. he decided diana would be buried where her grave could be easily cared for and visited in privacy by william, harry, and other relatives.

the initial french judicial investigation concluded that the crash was caused by pauls intoxication, reckless driving, speeding, and effects of prescription drugs. in february , mohamed alfayed, father of dodi fayed, publicly said the crash, which killed his son, had been planned, and accused mi and the duke of edinburgh. an inquest, which started in london in  and continued in  and , attributed the crash to grossly negligent driving by paul and to the pursuing paparazzi, who forced paul to speed into the tunnel. on  april , the jury returned a verdict of unlawful killing. on the day after the final verdict of the inquest, alfayed announced that he would end his year campaign to establish that the tragedy was murder; he said he did so for the sake of dianas children.

following her death, diana left a  million estate, netting  million after estate taxes, which were left in the hands of trustees, her mother, and her sister, lady sarah. the will was signed in june , but diana had it modified in february  to remove the name of her personal secretary from the list of trustees and have her sister replace him. after applying personal and inheritance taxes, a net estate of . million was left to be distributed among the beneficiaries. her two sons subsequently inherited the majority of her estate. each of them was left with . million which was invested and gathered substantial interest, and an estimated  million was given to each son upon turning  years old in  and  respectively. many of dianas possessions were initially left in the care of her brother who put them on show in althorp twice a year until they were returned to the princes. they were also put on display in american museums and as of  raised two million dollars for charities. among the objects were her dresses and suits along with numerous family paintings and jewels. dianas engagement ring and her yellow gold watch were given to william and harry, respectively. william later passed the ring to his wife, catherine middleton. her wedding dress was also given to her sons.in addition to her will, diana had also written a letter of wishes in which she had asked for threequarters of her personal property to be given to her sons, and dividing the remaining quarter  among her  godchildren. despite dianas wishes, the executors  petitioned the probate court for a variance of the will, and the letter of wishes was ignored because it did not contain certain language required by british law. eventually, one item from dianas estate was given to each of her godchildren, while they would have received , each, had a quarter of her estate been divided between them. the variance also prevented the estate from being distributed between her sons at the age of  but postponed it until they were . diana also left her butler paul burrell around , in cash.

in , after the submission of a freedom of information request by the internet news service apbonline.com, it was revealed that diana had been placed under surveillance by the national security agency until her death, and the organisation kept a top secret file on her containing more than , pages. the contents of dianas nsa file cannot be disclosed because of national security concerns. the nsa officials insisted diana was not a target of their massive, worldwide electronic eavesdropping infrastructure. despite multiple inquiries for the files to be declassifiedwith one of the notable ones being filed by mohamed alfayedthe nsa has refused to release the documents.in , ken wharfe, a former bodyguard of diana, claimed that her scandalous conversations with james gilbey  were in fact recorded by the gchq, which intentionally released them on a loop. people close to diana believed the action was intended to defame her. wharfe said diana herself believed that members of the royal family were all being monitored, though he also stated that the main reason for it could be the potential threats of the ira.

on the first anniversary of dianas death, people left flowers and bouquets outside the gates of kensington palace and a memorial service was held at westminster abbey. the royal family and the prime minister and his family went to crathie kirk for private prayers, while dianas family held a private memorial service at althorp. all flags at buckingham palace and other royal residences were flown at halfmast on the queens orders. the union jack was first lowered to halfmast on the day of dianas funeral and has set a precedent, as based on the previous protocol no flag could ever fly at halfmast over the palace even on the death of a monarch. since , however, the union flag  has flown at halfmast upon the deaths of members of the royal family, and other times of national mourning.

the concert for diana at wembley stadium was held on  july . the event, organised by the princes william and harry, celebrated the th anniversary of their mothers birth and occurred a few weeks before the th anniversary of her death on  august. the proceeds from this event were donated to dianas charities. on  august , a service of thanksgiving for diana took place in the guards chapel. among the  guests were members of the royal family and their relatives, members of the spencer family, her godparents and godchildren, members of her wedding party, her close friends and aides, representatives from many of her charities, gordon brown, tony blair and john major, and friends from the entertainment world such as david frost, elton john, and cliff richard.in january , a series of letters that diana and other members of the royal family had written to a buckingham palace steward were sold as a part of a collection. the six letters written by diana raised ,. another collection of  letters written by diana between  and  were sold for , at an auction in . in , two of dianas friends put  highly personal letters and cards written by her while she was going through her divorce up for auction, announcing that proceeds of the sale would be donated to charities associated with them or diana.diana her fashion story, an exhibition of gowns and suits worn by diana, was announced to be opened at kensington palace in february  as a tribute to mark her th death anniversary, with her favourite dresses created by numerous fashion designers being displayed until the next year. other tributes planned for the anniversary included exhibitions at althorp hosted by dianas brother, earl spencer, a series of commemorating events organised by the diana award, as well as restyling kensington gardens and creating a new section called the white garden.

diana remains one of the most popular members of the royal family throughout history, and she continues to influence the younger generations of royals. she was a major presence on the world stage from her engagement to charles until her death, and was often described as the worlds most photographed woman. she was noted for her compassion, style, charisma, and highprofile charity work, as well as her illfated marriage. biographer sarah bradford commented, the only cure for her suffering would have been the love of the prince of wales ... the way in which he consistently denigrated her reduced her to despair. despite all the marital issues and scandals, diana continued to enjoy a high level of popularity in the polls while her husband was suffering from low levels of public approval. dianas former private secretary patrick jephson described her as an organised and hardworking person, and pointed out charles was not able to reconcile with his wifes extraordinary popularity, a viewpoint supported by the biographer tina brown. he also said she was a tough boss who was equally quick to appreciate hard work but could also be defiant if she felt she had been the victim of injustice. dianas mother also defined her as a loving figure who could occasionally be tempestuous. she was often described as a devoted mother to her children, who are believed to be influenced by her personality and way of life.in the early years, diana was often noted for her shy nature. journalist michael white perceived her as being smart, shrewd and funny. those who communicated with her closely described her as a person who was led by her heart. in an article for the guardian, monica ali believed that, despite being inexperienced and uneducated, diana could handle the expectations of the royal family and overcome the difficulties and sufferings of her marital life. ali also believed that she had a lasting influence on the public discourse, particularly in matters of mental health by discussing her eating disorder publicly. according to tina brown, in her early years diana possessed a passive power, a quality that in her opinion she shared with the queen mother and a trait that would enable her to instinctively use her appeal to achieve her goals.diana was known for her encounters with sick and dying patients, and the poor and unwanted whom she used to comfort, an action that earned her more popularity. known for her easygoing attitude, she reportedly hated formality in her inner circle, asking people not to jump up every time she enters the room. diana is often credited with widening the range of charity works carried out by the royal family in a more modern style. eugene robinson of the washington post wrote in an article that diana imbued her role as royal princess with vitality, activism and, above all, glamour. alicia carroll of the new york times described diana as a breath of fresh air who was the main reason the royal family was known in the united states. in anthony holdens opinion, diana was visibly reborn after her separation from charles, a point in her life that was described by holden as her moment of triumph, which put her on an independent path to success.dianas sudden death brought an unprecedented spasm of grief and mourning, and subsequently a crisis arose in the royal household. andrew marr said that by her death she revived the culture of public sentiment. her son, prince william, has stated that the outpouring of public grief after her death changed the british psyche, for the better, while alastair campbell noted that it assisted in diminishing the stiff upper lip approach. in  diana was one of the runnersup for time magazines person of the year, and in  the magazine included dianas name on its list of  women of the year. she was chosen as the woman of the year  for her efforts in destigmatising the conditions surrounding hiv/aids patients. in  diana ranked third on the bbcs poll of the  greatest britons, above the queen and other british monarchs.despite being regarded as an iconic figure and a popular member of the royal family, diana was subject to criticism during her life. diana was criticised by philosophy professor anthony ohear who in his notes argued that she was unable to fulfill her duties, her reckless behaviour was damaging the monarchy, and she was selfindulgent in her philanthropic efforts. following his remarks, charity organisations that were supported by diana defended her, and peter luff called ohears comments distasteful and inappropriate. further criticism surfaced as she was accused of using her public profile to benefit herself, which in return demeaned her royal office. dianas unique type of charity work, which sometimes included physical contact with people affected by serious diseases occasionally had a negative reaction in the media.dianas relationship with the press and the paparazzi has been described as ambivalent. on different occasions she would complain about the way she was being treated by the media, mentioning that their constant presence in her proximity had made life impossible for her, whereas at other times she would seek their attention and hand information to reporters herself. writing for the guardian, peter conrad suggested that it was diana who let the journalists and paparazzi into her life as she knew they were the source of her power. this view was supported by christopher hitchens, who believed that in pursuit of a personal solution to an unhappy private life, she became an assiduous leaker to the press. tina brown argued that diana was in no way a vulnerable victim of media manipulation, and she found it offensive to present the canny, resourceful diana as a woman of no agency. former news of the world royal editor clive goodman, who later hacked the phones of dianas sons on several occasions, stated in a court in  that in  diana sent a confidential directory which contained numbers of senior members of the royal household to their office to get back at her then husband. nevertheless, diana also used the medias interest in her to shine light on her charitable efforts and patronages.sally bedell smith characterised diana as unpredictable, egocentric, and possessive. smith also argued that in her desire to do charity works, diana was motivated by personal considerations, rather than by an ambitious urge to take on a societal problem. eugene robinson, however, said that diana was serious about the causes she espoused. according to sarah bradford, diana looked down on the house of windsor, whom she reportedly viewed as jumpedup foreign princelings and called them the germans. tony blair characterised diana as a manipulative person and extraordinarily captivating.in an article written for the independent in , journalist yvonne roberts observed the sudden change in peoples opinion of diana after her death from critical to complimentary, a viewpoint supported by theodore dalrymple, who also noticed the sudden shift. roberts also added that diana was neither a saint nor a revolutionary figure, but may have encouraged some people to tackle issues such as landmines, aids and leprosy. while analysing the impact of dianas death and her popularity from a gendered point of view, the british historian ludmilla jordanova said no human being can survive the complex forces that impact upon charismatic women. jordanova also observed that it is better to remember her by trying to decipher how emotions overshadow analysis and why women are the safeguards of humanitarian feelings. the author anne applebaum believed that diana had not had any impact on public opinions posthumously; an idea supported by jonathan freedland of the guardian who believed that dianas memory and influence started to fade away in the years after her death, while peter conrad, another guardian contributor, argued that even in a decade after her death, she is still not silent, and allan massie of the telegraph believed that dianas sentiments continue to shape our society. writing for the guardian, monica ali described diana as fascinating and flawed. her legacy might be mixed, but its not insubstantial. her life was brief, but she left her mark.

diana was a fashion icon whose style was emulated by women around the world. in , time included diana on its alltime  fashion icons list. iain hollingshead of the telegraph wrote diana had an ability to sell clothes just by looking at them. an early example of the effect occurred during her courtship with charles in  when sales of hunter wellington boots skyrocketed after she was pictured wearing a pair on the balmoral estate. according to designers and people who worked with diana, she used fashion and style to endorse her charitable causes, express herself and communicate. diana remains a prominent figure for her fashion style, impacting recent cultural and style trends.the princesss fashion combined classically royal expectations with contemporary fashion trends in britain. while on diplomatic trips, her clothes and attire were chosen to match the destination countries costumes, and while offduty she used to wear loose jackets and jumpers. she was always very thoughtful about how her clothes would be interpreted, it was something that really mattered to her, according to anna harvey, a former british vogue editor and dianas fashion mentor. her fashion sense originally incorporated decorous and romantic elements, with pastel shades and lush gowns. elements of her fashion rapidly became trends. she forwent certain traditions, such as wearing gloves during engagements, and sought to create a wardrobe that helped her to connect with the public. according to donatella versace who worked closely with diana alongside her brother, dianas interest and sense of curiosity about fashion grew significantly after her marital separation. her style subsequently grew bolder and more businesslike, featuring structured skirt suits, sculptural gowns, and neutral tones designed to reflect attention toward her charity work.catherine walker was among dianas favourite designers with whom she worked to create her royal uniform. among her favoured designers were versace, armani, chanel, dior, gucci and clarks. her famous outfits include the black sheep sweater, the revenge dress, which she wore after charless admission of adultery, and the travolta dress. copies of dianas british voguefeatured pink chiffon blouse by david and elizabeth emanuel, which appeared in the magazine on her engagement announcement day, sold in the millions. she appeared on three british vogue covers during her lifetime and was featured on its october  issue posthumously. diana did her own makeup for events, and was accompanied by a hairstylist for public appearances. in the s, diana was frequently photographed clutching distinctive handbags manufactured by gucci and dior, which became known as the gucci diana and lady dior.following the opening of an exhibition of dianas clothes and dresses at kensington palace in , catherine bennett of the guardian said such exhibitions are among the suitable ways to commemorate public figures whose fashion styles were noted due to their achievements. the exhibition suggests to detractors who, like many other princesses, looking lovely in different clothes was pretty much her lifes work which also brings interest in her clothing. versace also pointed out that she doesnt think that anyone, before or after her, has done for fashion what diana did. one of dianas favourite milliners, john boyd, said diana was our best ambassador for hats, and the entire millinery industry owes her a debt. boyds pink tricorn hat diana wore for her honeymoon was later copied by milliners across the world and credited with rebooting an industry in decline for decades.

permanent memorials to diana include the diana, princess of wales memorial fountain in hyde park, london; the diana, princess of wales memorial playground in kensington gardens; the diana, princess of wales memorial walk, a circular path between kensington gardens, green park, hyde park, and st. jamess park; the diana memorial award, established in  and later relaunched in  by  gordon brown; the statue of diana, princess of wales, in the sunken garden of kensington palace; and the princess diana memorial in the garden of schloss cobenzl in vienna, making it the first memorial dedicated to diana in a germanspeaking country. the flame of liberty was erected in  on the place de lalma in paris above the entrance to the tunnel in which the fatal crash later occurred. it became an unofficial memorial to diana. the place de lalma was renamed place diana princesse de galles in . following her death, several countries issued postage stamps commemorating diana, including armenia, azerbaijan, somalia, and congo. a bronze plaque was unveiled by earl spencer at northampton guildhall in  as a memorial to his sister.there were two memorials inside harrods department store, commissioned by dodi fayeds father, who owned the store from  to . the first memorial was a pyramidshaped display containing photos of the princess and alfayeds son, a wine glass said to be from their last dinner, and a ring purchased by dodi the day prior to the crash. the second, innocent victims, unveiled in , was a bronze statue of fayed dancing with diana on a beach beneath the wings of an albatross. in january , it was announced that the statue would be returned to the alfayed family. dianas granddaughters, charlotte elizabeth diana  and lilibet diana , as well as her niece, charlotte diana spencer , are named after her.

before and after her death, diana has been the subject of films and television series and depicted in contemporary art. the first biopics about diana and charles were charles  diana a royal love story and the royal romance of charles and diana that were broadcast on american tv channels on  and  september , respectively. in december , abc aired charles and diana unhappily ever after, a tv movie about marital discord between diana and charles. actresses who have portrayed diana include serena scott thomas , julie cox , amy seccombe , michelle duncan , genevieve oreilly , nathalie brocker , naomi watts , jeanna de waal , emma corrin and elizabeth debicki , and kristen stewart .in , william and harry commissioned two documentaries to mark the th anniversary of her death. the first of the two, diana, our mother her life and legacy, was broadcast on itv and hbo on  july . this film focuses on dianas legacy and humanitarian efforts for causes such as aids, landmines, homelessness and cancer. the second documentary, diana,  days, aired on  august on bbc and focused on dianas death and the subsequent outpouring of grief.

diana was born with the style of the honourable diana frances spencer. when her father inherited the earldom of spencer in , she became entitled to the style of lady diana spencer. during her marriage to charles, prince of wales, diana was styled as her royal highness the princess of wales. she additionally bore the titles duchess of rothesay, duchess of cornwall, countess of chester, and baroness of renfrew. though popularly referred to as princess diana, that style is incorrect and one she never held officially. she is still sometimes referred to in the media as lady diana spencer or colloquially as lady di. in a speech after her death, prime minister tony blair referred to diana as the peoples princess. discussions were also held with the spencer family and the british royal family as to whether dianas hrh style needed to be restored posthumously, but dianas family decided that it would be against her wishes and, thus, no formal offer was made.

orders royal family order of queen elizabeth iiforeign honours supreme class of the order of the virtues 

 november  grand cross of the order of the crown, bestowed by queen beatrix of the netherlandsappointments royal bencher of the honourable society of the middle templefellowships the royal college of surgeons of england, honorary fellow in dental surgeryfreedom of the city october  cardiff

 january  carlisle

 london

 june  northampton borough

 october  portsmouth

as the princess of wales, diana held the following military appointments

australiacolonelinchief of the royal australian survey corpscanadacolonelinchief of the princess of wales own regiment 

colonelinchief of the west nova scotia regimentunited kingdomcolonelinchief of the princess of waless royal regiment

colonelinchief of the light dragoons

colonelinchief of the royal hampshire regiment

colonelinchief of the th/th royal hussars 

honorary air commodore, raf wittering

lady sponsor of hms cornwall 

lady sponsor of hms vanguard she relinquished these appointments following her divorce.

 november  lady sponsor of royal princess

diana was born into the british spencer family, different branches of which hold the titles of duke of marlborough, earl spencer, earl of sunderland, and baron churchill. the spencers claimed descent from a cadet branch of the powerful medieval despenser family, but its validity is questioned. her greatgrandmother was margaret baring, a member of the germanbritish baring family of bankers and the daughter of edward baring, st baron revelstoke. dianas distant noble ancestors included the first duke and duchess of marlborough. diana and charles were distantly related, as they were both descended from the house of tudor through henry vii of england. she was also descended from the house of stuart through charles ii of england by charles lennox, st duke of richmond, and henry fitzroy, st duke of grafton, and his brother james ii of england by henrietta fitzjames. other noble ancestors include margaret kerdeston, granddaughter of michael de la pole, nd earl of suffolk; robert devereux, nd earl of essex, an english nobleman and a favourite of elizabeth i of england; and edward seymour, st duke of somerset, a descendant of edward iii of england through his son lionel of antwerp, st duke of clarence. dianas scottish roots came from her maternal grandmother, lady fermoy. among her scottish ancestors were alexander gordon, th duke of gordon, and his wife jane, and archibald campbell, th earl of argyll.dianas american lineage came from her greatgrandmother frances ellen work, daughter of wealthy american stockbroker franklin h. work from ohio, who was married to her greatgrandfather james roche, rd baron fermoy, an irish peer. dianas fourth greatgrandmother in her direct maternal line, eliza kewark, was matrilineally of indian descent. she is variously described in contemporary documents as a darkskinned native woman and an armenian woman from bombay.

angelina jolie  is an american actress, filmmaker and humanitarian. the recipient of numerous accolades, including an academy award and three golden globe awards, she has been named hollywoods highestpaid actress multiple times.

jolie made her screen debut as a child alongside her father, jon voight, in lookin to get out . her film career began in earnest a decade later with the lowbudget production cyborg  , followed by her first leading role in hackers . she starred in the biographical television films george wallace  and gia  and won the academy award for best supporting actress for playing a sociopath in the  drama girl, interrupted. her role as the titular heroine in lara croft tomb raider  established her as a star. she continued her actionstar career with mr.  mrs. smith , wanted , and salt . she also received critical acclaim for her performances in the dramas a mighty heart  and changeling ; the latter earned her a nomination for the academy award for best actress. her biggest commercial successes include the fantasy picture maleficent , its  sequel, and the superhero film eternals . she has performed a voice role in the animation film series kung fu panda since . jolie has also directed and written the war dramas in the land of blood and honey , unbroken , and first they killed my father .

jolie is known for her humanitarian efforts, for which she has received a jean hersholt humanitarian award and made an honorary dame commander of the order of st michael and st george, among other honors. she promotes causes including conservation, education, and womens rights, and is most noted for her advocacy on behalf of refugees as a special envoy for the united nations high commissioner for refugees, a position she held until . jolie has undertaken over a dozen field missions globally to refugee camps and war zones.

as a public figure, jolie has been cited as one of the most powerful and influential people in the american entertainment industry. she has been cited as the worlds most beautiful woman by various media outlets. her personal life, including her relationships, marriages, and health, has been the subject of wide publicity. she is divorced from actors jonny lee miller, billy bob thornton and brad pitt. she has six children with pitt, three of whom were adopted internationally.

angelina jolie voight was born on june , , at cedarssinai hospital in los angeles, california, to actors jon voight and marcheline bertrand. she is the sister of actor james haven, and the niece of singersongwriter chip taylor and geologist and volcanologist barry voight. her godparents are actors jacqueline bisset and maximilian schell. on her fathers side, jolie is of german and slovak descent. jolie has claimed to have distant indigenous  ancestry through her frenchcanadian mother. however, her father says jolie is not seriously iroquois, saying it is something he and bertrand made up to make bertrand seem more exotic.following her parents separation in , she and her brother lived with their mother, who had abandoned her acting ambitions to focus on raising her children. jolies mother raised her as a catholic but did not require her to go to church. as a child, she often watched films with her mother and it was this, rather than her fathers successful career, that inspired her interest in acting, though she had a bit part in voights lookin to get out  at age seven. when jolie was six years old, bertrand and her livein partner, filmmaker bill day, moved the family to palisades, new york; they returned to los angeles five years later. jolie then decided she wanted to act and enrolled at the lee strasberg theatre institute, where she trained for two years and appeared in several stage productions.

jolie first attended beverly hills high school, where she felt isolated among the children of some of the areas affluent families because her mother had a more modest income. she was teased by other students, who targeted her for being extremely thin and for wearing glasses and braces. her early attempts at modeling, at her mothers insistence, proved unsuccessful. she transferred to moreno high school, an alternative school, where she became a punk outsider, wearing allblack clothing, going out moshing, and engaging in knife play with her livein boyfriend. she dropped out of her acting classes and aspired to become a funeral director, taking athome courses on embalming. at age , after the relationship had ended, jolie graduated from high school and rented her own apartment before returning to theater studies, though in  she referred to this period with the observation, i am still at heartand always will bejust a punk kid with tattoos.as a teenager, jolie found it difficult to emotionally connect with other people, and as a result she selfharmed, later commenting, for some reason, the ritual of having cut myself and feeling the pain, maybe feeling alive, feeling some kind of release, it was somehow therapeutic to me. she also struggled with insomnia and an eating disorder and began using drugs; by age , she had used just about every drug possible, particularly heroin. jolie had episodes of depression and planned to commit suicide twiceat age  and again at , when she attempted to hire a hitman to kill her. when she was , she experienced a nervous breakdown and was admitted for  hours to ucla medical centers psychiatric ward. two years later, after adopting her first child, jolie found stability, later stating, i knew once i committed to maddox, i would never be selfdestructive again.jolie has had a lifelong dysfunctional relationship with her father, which began when voight left the family when his daughter was less than a year old. she has said that from then on their time together was sporadic and usually carried out in front of the press. they reconciled when they appeared together in lara croft tomb raider , but their relationship again deteriorated. jolie petitioned the court to legally remove her surname, voight, in favor of her middle name, which she had long used as a stage name; the name change was granted on september , . voight then went public with their estrangement during an appearance on access hollywood, in which he claimed jolie had serious mental problems. at that point, her mother and brother also broke off contact with him. they did not speak for six and a half years but began rebuilding their relationship in the wake of bertrands death from ovarian cancer on january , , before going public with their reconciliation three years later.

jolie committed to acting professionally at the age of , but initially found it difficult to pass auditions, often being told that her demeanor was too dark. she appeared in five of her brothers student films, made while he attended the usc school of cinematelevision, as well as in several music videos, namely lenny kravitzs stand by my woman , antonello vendittis alta marea , the lemonheadss its about time , and meat loafs rock and roll dreams come through . she began to learn from her father, as she noticed his method of observing people to become like them. their relationship during this time was less strained, with jolie realizing that they were both drama queens.jolie began her professional film career in , when she played her first leading role in the directtovideo sciencefiction sequel cyborg , as a nearhuman robot designed for corporate espionage and assassination. she was so disappointed with the film that she did not audition again for a year. following a supporting role in the independent film without evidence , she starred in her first major studio film, hackers . the new york times critic janet maslin wrote that jolies character stands out ... because she scowls even more sourly than her costars and is that rare female hacker who sits intently at her keyboard in a seethrough top. hackers failed to make a profit at the box office, but developed a cult following after its video release. the role in hackers is considered jolies breakthrough.after starring in the modernday romeo and juliet adaptation love is all there is , jolie appeared in the road movie mojave moon . in foxfire  she played legs, a drifter who unites four teenage girls against a teacher who has sexually harassed them. jack mathews of the los angeles times wrote of her performance, it took a lot of hogwash to develop this character, but jolie, jon voights knockout daughter, has the presence to overcome the stereotype. though the story is narrated by maddy, legs is the subject and the catalyst.in , jolie starred with david duchovny in the thriller playing god, set in the los angeles underworld. the film was not well received by critics; chicago suntimes critic roger ebert wrote that jolie finds a certain warmth in a kind of role that is usually hard and aggressive; she seems too nice to be a mobsters girlfriend, and maybe she is. her next work, as a frontierswoman in the cbs miniseries true women , was even less successful; writing for the philadelphia inquirer, robert strauss dismissed her as horrid, a fourthrate scarlett ohara who relies on gnashed teeth and overly pouted lips. jolie also starred in the music video for the rolling stoness anybody seen my baby as a stripper who leaves midperformance to wander new york city.

jolies career prospects began to improve after she won a golden globe award for her performance in tnts george wallace , about the life of the segregationist alabama governor and presidential candidate george wallace, played by gary sinise. jolie portrayed wallaces second wife, cornelia, a performance lee winfrey of the philadelphia inquirer considered a highlight of the film. george wallace was very well received by critics and won, among other awards, the golden globe award for best miniseries or television film. jolie also received a nomination for an emmy award for her performance.jolie portrayed supermodel gia carangi in hbos gia . the film chronicles the destruction of carangis life and career as a result of her addiction to heroin, and her decline and death from aids in the mids. vanessa vance of reel.com retrospectively noted, jolie gained wide recognition for her role as the titular gia, and its easy to see why. jolie is fierce in her portrayalfilling the part with nerve, charm, and desperationand her role in this film is quite possibly the most beautiful train wreck ever filmed. for the second consecutive year, jolie won a golden globe award and was nominated for an emmy award. she also won her first screen actors guild award.in accordance with lee strasbergs method acting, jolie preferred to stay in character in between scenes during many of her early films. while shooting gia, she told her husband, jonny lee miller, that she would not be able to phone him id tell him im alone; im dying; im gay; im not going to see you for weeks. after gia wrapped, she briefly gave up acting, because she felt that she had nothing else to give. she separated from miller and moved to new york, where she took night classes at new york university to study directing and screenwriting. encouraged by her golden globe award win for george wallace and the positive critical reception of gia, jolie resumed her career.following the previously filmed gangster film hells kitchen , jolie returned to the screen in playing by heart , part of an ensemble cast that included sean connery, gillian anderson, and ryan phillippe. the film received predominantly positive reviews, and jolie was praised in particular; san francisco chronicle critic peter stack wrote, jolie, working through an overwritten part, is a sensation as the desperate club crawler learning truths about what shes willing to gamble. she won the breakthrough performance award from the national board of review.in , jolie starred in the comedydrama pushing tin, alongside john cusack, billy bob thornton, and cate blanchett. the film met with mixed reception from critics, and jolies characterthorntons seductive wifewas particularly criticized; writing for the washington post, desson howe dismissed her as a completely ludicrous writers creation of a freespirited woman who weeps over hibiscus plants that die, wears lots of turquoise rings and gets real lonely when russell spends entire nights away from home. jolie then costarred with denzel washington in the bone collector , playing a police officer who reluctantly helps washingtons quadriplegic detective track down a serial killer. the film grossed . million worldwide, but was critically unsuccessful. terry lawson of the detroit free press concluded, jolie, while always delicious to look at, is simply and woefully miscast.

jolie next took the supporting role of lisa, a sociopathic patient in a psychiatric hospital, in girl, interrupted , an adaptation of susanna kaysens memoir of the same name. she won her third golden globe award, her second screen actors guild award, and an academy award for best supporting actress in . for variety, emanuel levy noted, jolie is excellent as the flamboyant, irresponsible girl who turns out to be far more instrumental than the doctors in susannas rehabilitation.in , jolie appeared in her first summer blockbuster, gone in  seconds, which became her highestgrossing film to that point, earning . million internationally. she had a minor role as the mechanic exgirlfriend of a car thief played by nicolas cage; the washington post writer stephen hunter criticized that all she does in this movie is stand around, cooling down, modeling those fleshy, pulsating muscletubes that nest so provocatively around her teeth. jolie later explained that the film had been a welcome relief after her emotionally demanding role in girl, interrupted.

although widely praised for her acting and performances, jolie had rarely found films that appealed to a wide audience, but s lara croft tomb raider made her an international superstar. an adaptation of the popular tomb raider video games, the film required her to learn an english accent and undergo extensive martial arts training to play the archaeologistadventurer lara croft. although the film generated mostly negative reviews, jolie was generally praised for her physical performance; newsdays john anderson commented, jolie makes the title character a virtual icon of female competence and coolth. the film was an international hit, earning . million worldwide, and launched her global reputation as a female action star.

jolie next starred opposite antonio banderas as his mailorder bride in original sin , the first of a string of films that were poorly received by critics and audiences alike. the new york times critic elvis mitchell questioned jolies decision to follow her oscarwinning performance with softcore nonsense. the romantic comedy life or something like it , though equally unsuccessful, marked an unusual choice for jolie. salon magazines allen barra considered her ambitious newscaster character a rare attempt at playing a conventional womens role, noting that her performance doesnt get off the ground until a scene where she goes punk and leads a group of striking bus workers in singing satisfaction. despite her lack of box office success, jolie remained in demand as an actress; in , she established herself among hollywoods highestpaid actresses, earning  million per film for the next five years.

jolie reprised her role as lara croft in lara croft tomb raider  the cradle of life , which was not as lucrative as the original, earning . million at the international box office. she also starred in the music video for korns did my time, which was used to promote the sequel. her next film was beyond borders , in which she portrayed a socialite who joins an aid worker played by clive owen. though unsuccessful with audiences, the film stands as the first of several passion projects jolie has made to bring attention to humanitarian causes. beyond borders was a critical failure; kenneth turan of the los angeles times acknowledged jolies ability to bring electricity and believability to roles, but wrote that the limbo of a hybrid character, a badly written cardboard person in a flyinfested, bloodandguts world, completely defeats her.in , jolie appeared in four films. she first starred in the thriller taking lives as an fbi profiler summoned to help montreal law enforcement hunt down a serial killer. the film received mixed reviews; the hollywood reporter critic kirk honeycutt concluded, jolie plays a role that definitely feels like something she has already done, but she does add an unmistakable dash of excitement and glamour. jolie made a brief appearance as a fighter pilot in sky captain and the world of tomorrow, a science fiction adventure shot entirely with actors in front of a bluescreen, and voiced her first family film, the dreamworks animation shark tale. her supporting role as queen olympias in oliver stones alexander, about the life of alexander the great, was met with mixed reception, particularly concerning her slavic accent. commercially, the film failed in north america, which stone attributed to disapproval of the depiction of alexanders bisexuality, but it succeeded internationally, grossing . million.

in , jolie returned to major box office success with the actioncomedy mr.  mrs. smith, in which she starred opposite brad pitt as a bored married couple who find out that they are both secret assassins. the film received mixed reviews, but was generally lauded for the chemistry between the two leads; star tribune critic colin covert noted, while the story feels haphazard, the movie gets by on gregarious charm, galloping energy and the stars thermonuclear screen chemistry. with box office takings of . million worldwide, mr.  mrs. smith was the seventhhighest grossing picture of the year and remained jolies highestgrossing liveaction film for the next decade.following a supporting role as the neglected wife of a cia officer in robert de niros the good shepherd , jolie starred as mariane pearl in the documentarystyle drama a mighty heart . based on pearls memoir of the same name, the film chronicles the kidnapping and murder of her husband, the wall street journal reporter daniel pearl, in pakistan. although the multiracial pearl had personally chosen jolie for the role, the casting drew racial criticism and accusations of blackface. the resulting performance was widely praised; ray bennett of the hollywood reporter described it as wellmeasured and moving, played with respect and a firm grasp on a difficult accent. she received nominations for a golden globe award and a screen actors guild award. jolie also played grendels mother in the epic beowulf , created through motion capture. the film was critically and commercially wellreceived, earning . million worldwide.in , jolie was the highestpaid actress, earning  million per film. while other actresses had taken salary cuts during the time, jolies perceived box office appeal allowed her to command as much as  million plus a percentage. she starred alongside james mcavoy and morgan freeman in the action film wanted , which proved an international success, earning . million worldwide. the film received predominantly favorable reviews; writing for the new york times, manohla dargis noted that jolie was perfectly cast as a superscary, seemingly amoral assassin, adding that she cuts the kind of disciplinarian figure who can bring boys of all ages to their knees or at least into their theater seats.

jolie next took the lead role in clint eastwoods drama changeling . based in part on the wineville chicken coop murders, the film centers on christine collins, who is reunited with her kidnapped son in  los angeles, only to realize the boy is an imposter. chicago tribune critic michael phillips noted, jolie really shines in the calm before the storm, the scenes when one patronizing male authority figure after another belittles her at their peril. she received nominations for a golden globe award, a screen actors guild award, a bafta award, and an academy award for best actress. jolie also voiced tigress in the dreamworks animation kung fu panda , the first work in a major family franchise, later reprising her voice role in the sequels kung fu panda   and kung fu panda  .after her mothers death in , jolie appeared in fewer films, later explaining that her motivation to be an actress had stemmed from her mothers acting ambitions. her first film in two years was the  thriller salt, in which she starred as a cia agent who goes on the run after she is accused of being a kgb sleeper agent. originally written as a male character with tom cruise attached to star, agent salt underwent a gender change after a columbia pictures executive suggested jolie for the role. with revenues of . million, salt became an international success. the film received generally positive reviews, with jolies performance in particular earning praise. empire critic william thomas remarked, when it comes to selling incredible, crazy, deathdefying antics, jolie has few peers in the action business.jolie starred opposite johnny depp in the thriller the tourist . the film was a critical failure. roger ebert defended jolies performance, stating that she does her darndest and plays her femme fatale with flatout, dropdead sexuality. despite commercially underperforming in the us, the film succeeded at the international box office, cementing jolies appeal to international audiences. she received a golden globe award nomination for her performance, which prompted speculation that it had been given merely to ensure her highprofile presence at the awards ceremony.

after directing the documentary a place in time , which was distributed through the national education association, jolie made her feature directorial debut with in the land of blood and honey , a love story between a serb soldier and a bosniak prisoner, set during the  bosnian war. she conceived the film to rekindle attention for the survivors, after twice visiting bosnia and herzegovina in her role as a unhcr goodwill ambassador. to ensure authenticity, she cast only actors from the former yugoslaviaincluding stars goran kosti and zana marjanoviand incorporated their wartime experiences into her screenplay. upon release, the film received mixed reviews; todd mccarthy of the hollywood reporter wrote, jolie deserves significant credit for creating such a powerfully oppressive atmosphere and staging the ghastly events so credibly, even if it is these very strengths that will make people not want to watch whats onscreen. the film was nominated for a golden globe award for best foreign language film, and jolie was named an honorary citizen of sarajevo for raising awareness of the war.after a threeandahalfyear absence from the screen, jolie starred in maleficent , a liveaction reimagining of disneys  animation sleeping beauty. critical reception was mixed, but jolies performance in the titular role was singled out for praise; the hollywood reporter critic sherri linden found her to be the heart and soul of the film, adding that she doesnt chew the estimable scenery in maleficentshe infuses it, wielding a magnetic and effortless power. in its opening weekend, maleficent earned nearly  million at the north american box office and over  million in other markets, marking jolies appeal to audiences of all demographics in both action and fantasy films, genres usually dominated by male actors. the film went on to gross . million worldwide, becoming the fourthhighestgrossing film of the year and jolies highestgrossing film ever.jolie next completed her second directorial venture, unbroken , a film about louis zamperini , a former olympic track star and world war ii soldier who survived a plane crash and spent two years in a japanese prisonerofwar camp. she also served as producer under her jolie pas banner. based on laura hillenbrands biography of the same name, the film was scripted by the coen brothers and starred jack oconnell. after a positive early reception, unbroken was considered a likely best picture and best director contender, but it ultimately received mixed reviews and little award recognition, though it was named one of the best films of the year by the national board of review and the american film institute. variety magazines justin chang noted the films impeccable craftsmanship and sober restraint, but deemed it an extraordinary story told in dutiful, unexceptional terms. financially, unbroken was successful at the box office worldwide.

jolies next directorial effort was the marital drama by the sea , in which she starred opposite her husband, brad pitt, marking their first collaboration since s mr.  mrs. smith. based on her screenplay, the film was a deeply personal project for jolie, who drew inspiration from her own mothers life. critics, however, dismissed it as a vanity project, as part of an overall poor reception. writing for the washington post, stephanie merry noted its dearth of genuine emotion, stating, by the sea is dazzlingly gorgeous, as are its stars. but peeling back layer upon layer of exquisite ennui reveals nothing but emptiness, sprinkled with stilted sentiments. despite starring two of hollywoods leading actors, the film received only a limited release.as jolie preferred to dedicate herself to her humanitarian work, her cinematic output remained infrequent. first they killed my father , a drama set during cambodias khmer rouge era, again enabled her to combine both interests. in addition to directing the film, she cowrote the screenplay with her longtime friend loung ung, whose memoirs about the regimes child labor camps served as its source material. intended primarily for a cambodian audience, the film was produced directly for netflix, which allowed for the use of an exclusively khmer cast and script. labeling jolie as a skilled and sensitive filmmaker, rafer guzmn of newsday commended her for convincingly depicting the illogical hell of the khmer rouge era. it received nominations for the golden globe award for best foreign language film and bafta award for best film not in the english language.

jolie reprised the role of maleficent in the disney fantasy sequel maleficent mistress of evil , which received mixed reviews from critics but performed moderately well commercially, with a global gross of  million. the following year, she appeared alongside david oyelowo as grieving parents to the title characters of alice in wonderland and peter pan in the fantasy film come away. jolie starred as a smokejumper in taylor sheridans action thriller those who wish me dead. the film was released in may , garnering moderate reviews. the independents clarisse loughrey wrote jolies bareknuckled performance ... easily outclasses the film that contains it. jolie next played thena, a warrior with posttraumatic stress disorder, in the marvel cinematic universe superhero film eternals. released in november , the film generated divergent responses from audiences and critics. reviewing the film for the washington post, ann hornaday highlighted the touching naivete in jolies portrayal.jolies next project is a film adaptation of the novel without blood by alessandro baricco, which she directed, wrote, and produced. it stars salma hayek and demin bichir. she is set to star in pablo larrans biographical film about opera singer maria callas, titled maria. she is attached to produce and star in the thriller film the kept, an adaptation of the james scott novel.

jolie first witnessed the effects of a humanitarian crisis while filming lara croft tomb raider  in wartorn cambodia, an experience she later credited with having brought her a greater understanding of the world. upon her return home, jolie contacted the united nations high commissioner for refugees  for information on international trouble spots. to learn more about the conditions in these areas, she began visiting refugee camps around the world. in february , she went on her first field visit, an day mission to sierra leone and tanzania; she later expressed her shock at what she had witnessed.in the following months, jolie returned to cambodia for two weeks and met with afghan refugees in pakistan, where she donated  million in response to an international unhcr emergency appeal, the largest donation unhcr had ever received from a private individual. she covered all costs related to her missions and shared the same rudimentary working and living conditions as unhcr field staff on all of her visits. jolie was named a unhcr goodwill ambassador at unhcr headquarters in geneva on august , .

over the next decade, she went on more than  field missions, meeting with refugees and internally displaced persons in over  countries. in , when asked what she hoped to accomplish, she stated, awareness of the plight of these people. i think they should be commended for what they have survived, not looked down upon. to that end, her  field visits were chronicled in her book notes from my travels, which was published in october  in conjunction with the release of her humanitarian drama beyond borders.

jolie aimed to visit what she termed forgotten emergencies, crises that media attention had shifted away from. she became noted for traveling to war zones, such as sudans darfur region during the darfur conflict, the syrianiraqi border during the second gulf war, where she met privately with u.s. troops and other multinational forces, and the afghan capital kabul during the war in afghanistan, where three aid workers were murdered in the midst of her first visit. to aid her travels, she began taking flying lessons in  with the aim of ferrying aid workers and food supplies around the world. jolie acquired a pilot license in ; as of may , she owns a cirrus sr aircraft and a cessna  caravan aircraft.on april , , after more than a decade of service as a unhcr goodwill ambassador, jolie was promoted to the rank of special envoy to high commissioner antnio guterres, the first to take on such a position within the organization. in her expanded role, she was given authority to represent guterres and unhcr at the diplomatic level, with a focus on major refugee crises. in the months following her promotion, she made her first visit as special envoyher third over allto ecuador, where she met with colombian refugees, and she accompanied guterres on a weeklong tour of jordan, lebanon, turkey, and iraq, to assess the situation of refugees from neighboring syria. since then, jolie has been on over a dozen field missions around the world to meet with refugees and undertake advocacy on their behalf.jolie resigned from the ambassadorship in december . in her announcement, she pledged to continue to advocate for refugees.

in an effort to connect her cambodianborn adopted son with his heritage, jolie purchased a house in his country of birth in . the traditional home sat on  hectares in the northwestern province battambang, adjacent to samlout national park in the cardamom mountains, which had become infiltrated with poachers who threatened endangered species. she purchased the parks , hectares and turned the area into a wildlife reserve named for her son, the maddox jolie project. in recognition of her conservation efforts, king norodom sihamoni awarded her cambodian citizenship on july , .in november , jolie expanded the scope of the projectrenamed the maddox joliepitt foundation to create asias first millennium village, in accordance with un development goals. she was inspired by a meeting with the founder of millennium promise, noted economist jeffrey sachs, at the world economic forum in davos, where she was an invited speaker in  and . together they filmed a  mtv special, the diary of angelina jolie  dr. jeffrey sachs in africa, which followed them on a trip to a millennium village in western kenya. by mid, some , villagers and  employeessome of them former poachers employed as rangerslived and worked at mjp, in ten villages previously isolated from one another. the compound includes schools, roads, and a soy milk factory, all funded by jolie. her home functions as the mjp field headquarters.after filming beyond borders  in namibia, jolie became patron of the harnas wildlife foundation, a wildlife orphanage and medical center in the kalahari desert. she first visited the harnas farm during production of the film, which features vultures rescued by the foundation. in december , jolie and her partner, brad pitt, established the shiloh joliepitt foundation to support conservation work by the naankuse wildlife sanctuary, a nature reserve also located in the kalahari. in name of their namibianborn daughter, they have funded largeanimal conservation projects as well as a free health clinic, housing, and a school for the san bushmen community at naankuse. jolie and pitt support other causes through the joliepitt foundation, established in september .

jolie has pushed for legislation to aid child immigrants and other vulnerable children in both the u.s. and developing nations, including the unaccompanied alien child protection act of . she began lobbying humanitarian interests in the u.s. capital from  onwards, explaining, as much as i would love to never have to visit washington, thats the way to move the ball. since october , she has cochaired kids in need of defense , a network of leading u.s. law firms that provide free legal aid to unaccompanied minors in immigration proceedings across the u.s. founded in a collaboration between jolie and the microsoft corporation, by , kind had become the principal provider of pro bono lawyers for immigrant children. jolie had previously, from  to , funded the launch of a similar initiative, the u.s. committee for refugees and immigrants national center for refugee and immigrant children.

jolie has also advocated for childrens education. since its founding at the clinton global initiatives annual meeting in september , she has cochaired the education partnership for children of conflict, which provides policy and funding to education programs for children in conflictaffected regions. in its first year, the partnership supported education projects for iraqi refugee children, youth affected by the darfur conflict, and girls in rural afghanistan, among other affected groups. the partnership has worked closely with the council on foreign relations center for universal educationfounded by the partnerships cochair, noted economist gene sperlingto establish education policies, which resulted in recommendations made to un agencies, g development agencies, and the world bank. since april , all proceeds from jolies highend jewelry collection, style of jolie, have benefited the partnerships work. jolie additionally launched the malala fund, a grant system established by pakistani education activist malala yousafzai, at the  women in the world summit; she personally contributed over , to the cause.jolie has funded a school and boarding facility for girls at kakuma refugee camp in northwestern kenya, which opened in , and two primary schools for girls in the returnee settlements tangi and qalai gudar in eastern afghanistan, which opened in march  and november  respectively. in addition to the facilities at the millennium village she established in cambodia, jolie had built at least ten other schools in the country by . in february , she opened the maddox chivan childrens center, a medical and educational facility for children affected by hiv, in the cambodian capital phnom penh. in sebeta, ethiopia, the birthplace of her eldest daughter, she funds a sister facility, the zahara childrens center, which treats and educates children who have hiv or tuberculosis. both centers are run by the global health committee.jolie is the executive producer of the bbc program my world which aims to teach teenagers how to think critically about what they read and how to tell highquality journalism from bad. she and amnesty international released a childrens rights book titled know your rights and claim them on september , . she coauthored the book with british human rights lawyer geraldine van bueren.

after jolie joined the council on foreign relations  in june , she hosted a symposium on international law and justice at cfr headquarters and funded several cfr special reports, including intervention to stop genocide and mass atrocities. in january , she established the jolie legal fellowship, a network of lawyers and attorneys who are sponsored to advocate the development of human rights in their countries. its member attorneys, called jolie legal fellows, have facilitated child protection efforts in haiti in the wake of the  earthquake and promoted the development of an inclusive democratic process in libya following the  revolution.jolie has fronted a campaign against sexual violence in military conflict zones by the uk government, which made the issue a priority of its  g presidency. in may , she launched the preventing sexual violence initiative  with foreign secretary william hague, who was inspired to campaign on the issue by her bosnian war drama in the land of blood and honey . psvi was established to complement wider uk government work by raising awareness and promoting international cooperation. jolie spoke on the subject at the g foreign ministers meeting, where the attending nations adopted a historic declaration, and before the un security council, which responded by adopting its broadest resolution on the issue to date. in june , she cochaired the fourday global summit to end sexual violence in conflict, the largestever meeting on the subject, which resulted in a protocol endorsed by  nations.through her work on the psvi, jolie met foreign policy experts chloe dalton and arminka helic, who served as special advisers to hague. their collaboration resulted in the  founding of jolie pitt dalton helic, a partnership dedicated to womens rights and international justice, among other causes. in may , jolie was appointed a visiting professor at the london school of economics to contribute to a postgraduate degree program at the universitys centre on women, peace and security, which she had launched with hague the previous year. in february , jolie with her daughter zahara visited washington, d.c. for the senate introduction of the violence against women reauthorization act, a bill designed to prevent and respond to domestic violence, sexual assault, dating violence, and stalking. she worked closely with the bills sponsors and advocates. shes also an advocate for kaydens law, a law focuses on traumainformed court processes, legal standards and judicial training that minimizes the risk of harm to children. jolie is an advocate for the passage of the justice for all reauthorization act of , a law created to improve crime victims right to evidence and agency reports, forensic science, end the rape kit backlog, and address racial disparities in wrongful convictions in americas criminal legal system.in september , jolie made a donation to two young boys who were running a lemonade stand in london to raise money for the people of yemen, as the country was on the brink of humanitarian crisis caused by the saudiled coalition and houthi rebels. in march , a month into the russian invasion of ukraine, jolie visited ukrainian children at the vatican childrens hospital bambino ges. according to the clinic, jolie commented, i am praying for an end to the war. this is the only way to end the suffering and the flight from the conflict zone. its terrifying to see children paying the price in lost lives, compromised health and trauma. in may , jolie visited lviv, ukraine to meet with more displaced and hospitalized children.in , jolie voiced strong criticism of israel for its military actions in gaza during the  israelhamas war. in a statement posted on instagram, jolie condemned what she described as the deliberate bombing of a trapped population in the densely populated palestinian enclave. she accused global leaders of complicity in these crimes for their silence and demanded a humanitarian ceasefire.

jolie has received wide recognition for her humanitarian work. in august , she received the inaugural humanitarian award from the church world services immigration and refugee program, and in october , she was the first recipient of the citizen of the world award by the united nations correspondents association. she was awarded the global humanitarian award by the unausa in october , and she received the freedom award from the international rescue committee in november . in october , un high commissioner for refugees antnio guterres presented jolie with a gold pin reserved for the most longserving staff, in recognition of her decade as a unhcr goodwill ambassador.in november , jolie received the jean hersholt humanitarian award, an honorary academy award, from the board of governors of the academy of motion picture arts and sciences. in june , she was appointed an honorary dame commander of the order of st michael and st george  for her services to the uks foreign policy and campaigning to end sexual violence in war zones. queen elizabeth ii presented jolie with the insignia of her honorary damehood during a private ceremony the following october.

jolie had a serious boyfriend for two years from the age of . her mother allowed them to live together in her home, of which jolie later said, i was either going to be reckless on the streets with my boyfriend or he was going to be with me in my bedroom with my mom in the next room. she made the choice, and because of it, i continued to go to school every morning and explored my first relationship in a safe way. she has compared the relationship to a marriage in its emotional intensity, and said that the breakup compelled her to dedicate herself to her acting career at age .during filming of hackers , jolie had a romance with actor jonny lee miller, her first lover since the relationship in her early teens. they were not in touch for months after production ended, but eventually reconnected and married soon after in march . she attended her wedding in black rubber pants and a white tshirt, upon which she had written the grooms name in her blood. although the relationship ended the following year, jolie remained on good terms with miller, whom she called a solid man and a solid friend. their divorce, initiated by jolie in february , was finalized shortly before she remarried the next year.prior to her marriage to miller, jolie began a relationship with model and actress jenny shimizu on the set of foxfire . in , she said, i would probably have married jenny if i hadnt married my husband. i fell in love with her the first second i saw her. according to shimizu, their relationship lasted several years and continued even while jolie was romantically involved with other people. in a  interview with the lesbian magazine girlfriends, she was asked how she felt about being a sex symbol to both men and women; she responded its great because i love men and women. in , when asked if she was bisexual, jolie answered, of course. if i fell in love with a woman tomorrow, would i feel that its okay to want to kiss and touch her if i fell in love with her absolutely yes

after a twomonth courtship, jolie married actor billy bob thornton on may , , in las vegas. they had met on the set of pushing tin  but did not pursue a relationship at that time, as thornton was engaged to actress laura dern, while jolie was reportedly dating actor timothy hutton, her costar in playing god . as a result of their frequent public declarations of passion and gestures of lovemost famously wearing one anothers blood in vials around their neckstheir marriage became a favorite topic of the entertainment media. jolie and thornton announced the adoption of a child from cambodia in march  but abruptly separated three months later. their divorce was finalized on may , . when asked about the sudden dissolution of their marriage, jolie stated, it took me by surprise, too, because overnight, we totally changed. i think one day we had just nothing in common. and its scary but ... i think it can happen when you get involved and you dont know yourself yet.jolie was involved in a prominent scandal when she was accused of causing the divorce of actors brad pitt and jennifer aniston in october . she said she fell in love with pitt during the filming of mr.  mrs. smith , but dismissed allegations of an affair, saying, to be intimate with a married man, when my own father cheated on my mother, is not something i could forgive. i could not look at myself in the morning if i did that. i wouldnt be attracted to a man who would cheat on his wife. neither jolie nor pitt would publicly comment on the nature of their relationship until january , when she confirmed they were expecting their first child together.during their year relationship, the couple were dubbed brangelinaa portmanteau coined by the mediaand were the subject of worldwide media coverage. they became known as one of hollywoods most glamorous couples. their family grew to include six children, three of whom were adopted, before they announced their engagement in april . jolie and pitt were legally married on august , , and had their wedding on august , , at their estate chteau miraval in correns, france. she subsequently took the name angelina jolie pitt. after two years of marriage, the couple separated on september , . on september , jolie filed for divorce citing irreconcilable differences. they were declared legally single on april , . after pitt sued jolie for selling her share of a winery they owned to a third party, she filed a countersuit, in which she alleged that he physically and verbally abused her and their children on a plane in .

jolie has six children three were adopted internationally, while three are biological.

on march , , jolie adopted her first child, sevenmonthold maddox chivan, from an orphanage in battambang, cambodia. he was born as rath vibol on august , , in a local village. after twice visiting cambodia, while filming lara croft tomb raider  and on a unhcr field mission, jolie returned in november  with her thenhusband, billy bob thornton, where they met and subsequently applied to adopt maddox. the adoption process was halted the following month when the u.s. government banned adoptions from cambodia amid allegations of child trafficking. although jolies adoption facilitator was later convicted of visa fraud and money laundering, her adoption of maddox was deemed lawful. once the process was finalized, she took custody of maddox in namibia, where she was filming beyond borders . jolie and thornton announced the adoption together, but she adopted maddox alone, becoming a single parent following her separation from thornton three months later.jolie adopted her second child, sixmonthold zahara marley, from an orphanage in addis ababa, ethiopia, on july , . zahara was born as yemsrach on january , , in awasa. jolie initially believed zahara to be an aids orphan, based on official testimony from her grandmother, but zaharas birth mother later came forward in the media. she explained that she had abandoned her family when zahara became sick, and said she thought zahara was very fortunate to have been adopted by jolie. jolie was accompanied by her thenpartner, brad pitt, when she traveled to ethiopia to take custody of zahara. she later indicated that they had together made the decision to adopt from ethiopia, having first visited the country earlier that year. after pitt announced his intention to adopt her children, she filed a petition to legally change their surname from jolie to joliepitt, which was granted on january , . pitt adopted maddox and zahara soon after.

in an attempt to avoid the unprecedented media frenzy surrounding their relationship, jolie and pitt traveled to namibia for the birth of their first biological child. on may , , she gave birth to shiloh nouvel, in swakopmund. shilohs middle name is homage to french architect jean nouvel. during labor, jolie had fits of hysteric laughter due to the administration of morphine. they sold the first pictures of shiloh through the distributor getty images with the aim of benefiting charity, rather than allowing paparazzi to take the photographs. people and hello magazines purchased the north american and british rights to the images for . and . million, respectively, a record in celebrity photojournalism at that time, with all proceeds donated to unicef.on march , , jolie adopted her fourth child, threeyearold pax thien, from an orphanage in ho chi minh city, vietnam. pax was born as pham quang sang on november , , in hcmc, and was abandoned soon after birth. after visiting the orphanage with pitt in november , jolie applied for adoption as a single parent, because vietnams adoption regulations do not allow unmarried couples to coadopt. after their return to the united states, she petitioned the court to change pax thiens surname from jolie to joliepitt, which was approved on may . pitt subsequently adopted pax on february , .at the  cannes film festival, jolie confirmed that she was expecting twins. for the two weeks she spent in a seaside hospital in nice, france, reporters and photographers camped outside on the promenade. she gave birth to twins knox lon and vivienne marcheline, on july , . knox lon was named after two of the twins ancestors and vivienne marcheline was named in honor of jolies mother. the first pictures of knox and vivienne were jointly sold to people and hello for a reported  millionthe most expensive celebrity photographs ever taken. all proceeds were donated to the joliepitt foundation.

on february , , at age , jolie underwent a preventive double mastectomy after learning she had an  risk of developing breast cancer due to a defective brca gene. her maternal family history warranted genetic testing for brca mutations her mother had breast cancer and died of ovarian cancer, while her grandmother died of ovarian cancer. her aunt, who had the same brca defect, died of breast cancer three months after jolies operation. following the mastectomy, which lowered her chances of developing breast cancer to under five percent, jolie had reconstructive surgery involving implants and allografts . two years later, in march , after annual test results indicated possible signs of early ovarian cancer, she underwent a preventive salpingooophorectomy , as she had a fifty percent risk of developing ovarian cancer due to the same genetic anomaly. despite hormone replacement therapy, the surgery brought on premature menopause.

after completing each operation, jolie discussed her mastectomy and oophorectomy in opeds published by the new york times, with the aim of helping other women make informed health choices. she detailed her diagnosis, surgeries, and personal experiences, and described her decision to undergo preventive surgery as a proactive measure for the sake of her six children. jolie further wrote on a personal note, i do not feel any less of a woman. i feel empowered that i made a strong choice that in no way diminishes my femininity.jolies announcement of her mastectomy attracted widespread publicity and discussion on brca mutations and genetic testing. her decision was met with praise from various public figures, while health campaigners welcomed her raising awareness of the options available to atrisk women. dubbed the angelina effect by a time cover story, jolies influence led to a global and longlasting increase in brca gene testing the number of referrals tripled in australia and doubled in the united kingdom, parts of canada, and india, as well as significantly increased in other european countries and the united states. researchers in canada and the united kingdom found that despite the large increase, the percentage of mutation carriers remained the same, meaning jolies message had reached those most at risk. in her first oped, jolie had advocated for wider accessibility of brca gene testing and acknowledged the high costs, which were greatly reduced after a  u.s. supreme court ruling invalidated brca gene patents held by myriad genetics.

as the daughter of actor jon voight, jolie appeared in the media from an early age. early in her own career, she earned a reputation as a wild child, which contributed to her success in the late s and early s. celebrity profiles routinely covered her fascination with blood and knives, experiences with drugs, and her sex life, particularly her bisexuality and interest in sadomasochism. in , when asked about her outspokenness, she stated i say things that other people might go through. thats what artists should dothrow things out there and not be perfect and not have answers for anything and see if people understand. another contributing factor to her controversial image were tabloid rumors of incest that began when jolie, upon winning her oscar for girl, interrupted, kissed her brother on the lips and said, im so in love with my brother right now. she dismissed the rumors, saying, it was disappointing that something so beautiful and pure could be turned into a circus, and explained that, as children of divorced parents, she and james relied on one another for emotional support.jolies reputation began to change positively after she, at age , became a goodwill ambassador for the united nations high commissioner for refugees, later commenting, in my early s i was fighting with myself. now i take that punk in me to washington, and i fight for something important. owing to her extensive activism, her q scorea marketing industry measure of celebrities likabilitynearly doubled to  between  and . her recognizability grew accordingly; by , she was familiar to  of americans, compared to  in . she became noted for her ability to positively influence her public image through the media, without employing a publicist or an agent. her q score remained above average even when, in , she was accused of ending brad pitts marriage to jennifer aniston, at which point her public persona became an unlikely combination of alleged homewrecker, mother, sex symbol, and humanitarian. jolie was found to be the most admired woman in the world in global surveys conducted by yougov in  and .jolies general influence and wealth are extensively documented. in a  global industry survey by acnielsen in  international markets, jolie, together with pitt, was found to be the favorite celebrity endorser for brands and products worldwide. jolie was the face of st. john and shiseido from  to , and a decade later became a spokesmodel for guerlain. her  endorsement deal with louis vuitton, reportedly worth  million, was a record for a single advertising campaign. jolie was among the time , a list of the most influential people in the world as published by time, in  and . she was named the worlds most powerful celebrity in forbess celebrity  issue in , and, though ranked lower overall, was listed as the most powerful actress from  to  and  to . forbes additionally cited her as hollywoods highestpaid actress in , , and , with estimated annual earnings of  million,  million, and  million respectively.

jolies public image is strongly tied to her perceived beauty and sex appeal. many media outlets, including vogue, people, and vanity fair, have cited her as the worlds most beautiful woman, while others such as esquire, fhm, and empire have named her the sexiest woman alive; both titles have often been based on public polls in which jolie places far ahead of other celebrity women. her most recognizable physical features are her many tattoos, eyes, and in particular her full lips, which the new york times considered as defining a feature as kirk douglas chin or bette davis eyes. among her estimated  tattoos are the latin proverb quod me nutrit me destruit , the tennessee williams quote a prayer for the wild at heart, kept in cages, four buddhist sanskrit prayers of protection, a inch tiger, and geographical coordinates of where she first met her adopted children. over time, she has covered or lasered several of her tattoos, including billy bob, the name of her second husband.professionally, jolies status as a sex symbol has been considered both an asset and a hindrance. some of her most commercially successful films, including lara croft tomb raider  and beowulf , overtly relied at least in part on her sex appeal, with empire stating that her pneumatic figure, feline eyes, and beestung lips have greatly contributed to her appeal to audiences. conversely, salon writer allen barra agreed with critics who suggested that jolies dark and intense sexuality has limited her in the types of roles she can be cast in, thus rendering her unconvincing in many conventional womens roles, while clint eastwood, who directed her oscarnominated performance in changeling , opined that having the most beautiful face on the planet sometimes harmed her dramatic credibility with audiences.jolies appearance has been credited with influencing popular culture at large. in , afterellen founder sarah warn observed that many women of all sexual orientations had publicly expressed their attraction to jolie, which she considered a new development in american culture, adding that there are many beautiful women in hollywood, and few generate the same kind of overwhelming interest across genders and sexual orientations that she does. jolies physical attributes became highly soughtafter among western women seeking cosmetic surgery; by , she was considered the gold standard of beauty, with her full lips remaining the most imitated celebrity feature well into the s. after a  repeat survey by allure found that jolie most represented the american beauty ideal, compared to model christie brinkley in , writer elizabeth angell credited society with having branched out beyond the barbiedoll ideal and embraced something quite different. in , jeffrey kluger of time agreed that jolie has for many years symbolized the feminine ideal, and opined that her frank discussion of her double mastectomy redefined beauty.jolie is considered a style icon and trendsetter for celebrity fashion. she first began making red carpet appearances at age ten. in the s, she established an enduring partnership with versace. in her early film career, she became known for wearing gothic styles and leather, coquette looks; her style was seen as dark, vampish, dramatic, and alluring. her sequined randolph duke gown at the  golden globe awards was regarded as her fashion debut. jolie wore a white satin dress by marc bouwer to the th academy awards, which drew critical praise and comparisons to the fashion of several classic film stars. as she transitioned to directorial and humanitarian work, her style grew more sophisticated, minimalist, and glamorous, with looks associated with old hollywood. in the s, jolie wore satin gowns, diamond jewelry, and grecian silhouettes. she attended the th academy awards in a black versace gown, which has been deemed one of the most significant gowns in fashion history and pop culture, with jolies posing becoming the subject of internet memes. jolie prefers to invest in quality pieces, and in the s, adopted more sustainable fashion.

jolie has appeared in over thirty film productions since . according to the review aggregator site rotten tomatoes and infotainment website screen rant, her most critically acclaimed and commercially successful films are playing by heart , gia , gone in  seconds , lara croft tomb raider , lara croft tomb raider  the cradle of life , sky captain and the world of tomorrow , alexander , mr.  mrs. smith , beowulf , a mighty heart , changeling , kung fu panda , wanted , salt , the tourist , maleficent , and maleficent mistress of evil . her television projects comprise cbs miniseries true women and tnts george wallace.jolie has directed a number of films, such as in the land of blood and honey , unbroken , by the sea , and first they killed my father . her producing and executive producing credits include in the land of blood and honey , unbroken , maleficent , first they killed my father  and maleficent mistress of evil . jolie served as a screenwriter for in the land of blood and honey , by the sea  and first they killed my father .

jolie, angelina . notes from my travels visits with refugees in africa, cambodia, pakistan and ecuador.

amnesty international; jolie, angelina; van bueren, geraldine . know your rights and claim them a guide for youth.

jolie, angelina . my medical choice. the new york times.

jolie, angelina . the price of inaction in syria. time. vol. , no.  . pp. .

notes

meghan, duchess of sussex  is an american member of the british royal family and former actress married to prince harry, duke of sussex, the younger son of king charles iii. 

meghan was born and raised in los angeles, california. her acting career began at northwestern university. she played the part of rachel zane for seven seasons  in the american tv legal drama suits. she also developed a social media presence, which included the tig , a lifestyle blog. during the tig period, meghan became involved in charity work focused primarily on womens issues and social justice. she was married to american film producer trevor engelson from  until their divorce in .

meghan retired from acting upon her marriage to prince harry in  and became known as the duchess of sussex. meghan and harry have two children, prince archie and princess lilibet.  the couple stepped down as working royals in january , moved to meghans native southern california and launched archewell inc., a beverly hillsbased mix of forprofit and notforprofit  business organizations. in march , she sat for oprah with meghan and harry, a muchpublicized american television interview with her husband and oprah winfrey.  she has released the bench  and launched a podcast archetypes. meghan and harry filmed harry  meghan, a netflix docuseries, which was released in december .

rachel meghan markle was born on august , , at west park hospital in canoga park, los angeles, california, to doria ragland , a social worker and former makeup artist, and thomas markle sr. , an emmy award winning television lighting director and director of photography. she identifies as mixed race, often answering questions about her background with my dad is caucasian and my mom is african american. im half black and half white. her parents separated when she was two years old and divorced four years later. she has a close relationship with her mother. thomas markle sr. worked as a director of photography and lighting for general hospital and married... with children, and meghan occasionally visited the set of married... with children as a child. she has been estranged from her father and paternal halfsiblings, samantha markle and thomas markle jr.growing up in view parkwindsor hills, los angeles, markle attended hollywood little red schoolhouse. both her parents contributed to raising her until the age of , after which her father was left in charge of caring for her as her mother pursued a career. at age , she and her classmates wrote to procter  gamble to genderneutralize a dishwashing soap commercial on national television. she was raised as a protestant but graduated from l.a.s immaculate heart high school, an allgirl catholic school. markle took part in plays and musicals at the school, where her father helped with lighting. during her teenage years, she worked at a local frozen yogurt shop and later as a waitress and babysitter. she also volunteered at a soup kitchen in skid row, los angeles. in , she was admitted to northwestern university  in evanston, illinois, where she joined kappa kappa gamma sorority. with other members of kappa kappa gamma, markle did volunteer work with the glass slipper project. after her junior year, she secured an internship as a junior press officer at the american embassy in buenos aires, with the help of her uncle michael markle, and considered a political career. however, she did not score high enough in the foreign service officer test to proceed further with the us state department and returned to nu. she also attended a study abroad program in madrid. in , markle earned her bachelors degree with a double major in theater and international studies from northwesterns school of communication.

according to markle, she had some difficulty getting roles early in her career due to being ethnically ambiguous because i wasnt black enough for the black roles and i wasnt white enough for the white ones. to support herself between acting jobs, she worked as a freelance calligrapher and taught bookbinding. her first onscreen appearance was a small role as a nurse in an episode of the daytime soap opera general hospital, a show for which her father served as a lighting director. markle had small guest roles on the television shows century city , the war at home  and csi ny . for her role in century city, she told the casting directors that she was a sagaftra member when she was not, but after being cast, the employers were obliged to help her join the union according to the tafthartley act. markle also did several contract acting and modeling jobs. between  and , she worked as a briefcase girl on  episodes of the us version of the game show deal or no deal. she appeared in foxs series fringe as junior agent amy jessup in the first two episodes of its second season.markle appeared in small roles in the films get him to the greek, remember me  and the candidate in  and the film horrible bosses in . she was paid , for her role in remember me and , for her role in the short film the candidate. in july , she joined the cast of the usa network show suits through to late  and the seventh season. her character, rachel zane, began as a paralegal and eventually became an attorney.  while working on suits, she lived for nine months each year in toronto. fortune magazine estimated that she was paid , per episode, amounting to an equivalent annual salary of ,.

markle and american film producer trevor engelson began dating in . they were married in ocho rios, jamaica on august , . they separated in july  and concluded a nofault divorce in february , citing irreconcilable differences. markles subsequent livein relationship with canadian celebrity chef and restaurateur cory vitiello ended in may  after almost two years.

in mid, markle began a relationship with prince harry, a grandson of queen elizabeth ii. according to the couple, they first connected with each other via instagram, and they have also said that they were set up on a blind date by a mutual friend in july . on november , eight days after the relationship was made public by the press, the prince directed his communications secretary to release a statement on his behalf to express personal concern about pejorative and false comments made about his girlfriend by mainstream media and internet trolls. later, in a letter to a british media regulator, markles representatives complained about harassment from journalists. in september , markle and prince harry appeared together in public in toronto at the invictus games, of which harry is founding patron.meghan markles engagement to prince harry was announced on november , , by harrys father charles . the announcement was greeted with enthusiasm by the british media and prompted generally positive comments about a mixedrace person as a member of the royal family, especially in regard to commonwealth countries. markle announced that she would retire from acting and her intention to become a british citizen.

in preparation for the wedding, the archbishop of canterbury, justin welby, baptized markle and confirmed her in the church of england on march , . the private ceremony, performed with water from the river jordan, took place in the chapel royal at st jamess palace. the marriage ceremony was held on may  at st georges chapel, windsor castle. her wedding dress was designed by clare waight keller. markle later revealed that there was a private exchange of vows three days earlier, with the archbishop of canterbury in the couples garden. however, this private exchange of vows was not a legally recognized marriage.after the wedding, the duke and duchess lived at nottingham cottage within the grounds of kensington palace in london. in may , it was reported that they had signed a twoyear lease on westfield large, located on the great tew estate in the cotswolds. they gave up the lease after photos of the house and its interior were published by a paparazzi agency. the couple considered settling at the bedroom apartment  within the grounds of kensington palace, but moved to frogmore cottage in the home park of windsor castle instead. the crown estate refurbished the cottage at a cost of . million, paid out of the sovereign grant, with the duke later reimbursing expenses beyond restoration and ordinary maintenance, a part of which was offset against rental payments that were due at the time. meghan gave birth to a son, archie, on may , . the duke and duchess of sussexs office moved to buckingham palace and officially closed on march , , when the sussexes withdrew from undertaking official royal engagements. after some months in canada and the united states, in june , the couple bought a house on the former estate of riven rock, montecito, california. the next month, meghan suffered a miscarriage. she gave birth to a daughter, lilibet, on june , . the duke and duchess own a labrador named pula and two beagles named guy and mamma mia. meghan previously owned a labradorgerman shepherd cross named bogart.

markle was politically vocal before marrying prince harry. at age , she and her friends reportedly campaigned against the gulf war. decades later, she backed hillary clinton during the  united states presidential election and publicly denounced the opponent and eventual winner, donald trump. in the same year, when the referendum on the united kingdoms membership of the european union resulted in favor of brexit, markle expressed her disappointment on instagram. in , markle recommended the book who rules the world by leftwing intellectual noam chomsky on her instagram account.in july , irish senator catherine noone tweeted that the duchess was pleased to see the result of the irish referendum on legalizing abortion. meghan received criticism for potentially breaching the protocol that prohibits royals from interfering in politics; noone deleted her tweet and emphasized that her statement was misleading and the duchess was not in any way political.after she returned to the united states and as an eligible voter, she released a video with her husband encouraging others to register for the  united states presidential election on national voter registration day. some media outlets took it as an implicit endorsement of the democratic candidate, joe biden, which prompted thenpresident trump to dismiss their messaging at a press conference. in october , she penned an open letter to senate majority leader chuck schumer and house speaker nancy pelosi, advocating for paid leave for parents. her remarks were met by backlash from republican representatives jason smith and lisa mcclain, who found her statement out of touch and criticized her interference with american politics while utilizing her british royal titles. meghan has reportedly lobbied senators from both parties on the issue of paid family leave, including democratic senators patty murray and kirsten gillibrand, as well as republican senators shelley moore capito and susan collins. she has also publicly spoken in support of federal voting protections.in february , she voiced her support for the supreme court nomination of ketanji brown jackson. in june , she publicly supported moms demand action, an organization which campaigns for safer gun laws in the us. in the same month, in an interview with jessica yellin for vogue, meghan criticized the supreme court of the united statess decision that abortion is not a protected constitutional right and voiced her support for the proposed equal rights amendment.

after becoming engaged, markles first official public appearance with prince harry was at a world aids day walkabout in nottingham on december , . on march , the  commonwealth day service at westminster abbey was the first royal event she attended with the queen. on march , harry and meghan made an unannounced day visit to northern ireland. in total, markle attended  public engagements prior to the wedding. meghans first official engagement after marriage was on may , when she and her husband attended a garden party celebrating the charity work of king charles iii .in july , meghans first official trip abroad as a royal was to dublin, ireland, alongside harry. in october , the duke and duchess traveled to sydney for the  invictus games. this formed part of a pacific tour that included australia, fiji, tonga and new zealand. as representatives of the queen, the couple were greeted warmly by crowds in sydney, and the announcement of meghans pregnancy hours after their arrival delighted the public and media. during their visit to morocco in february , the duke and duchess focused on projects centered on womens empowerment, girls education, inclusivity and encouragement of social entrepreneurship. meghan also participated in her husbands work as youth ambassador to the commonwealth, which included overseas tours.as part of establishing a separate office from kensington palace in , the duke and duchess created an instagram social media account, which broke the record for the fastest account at the time to reach a million followers. in july , the duchesss security team were criticized for creating an empty zone of about  seats around her at wimbledon where she was watching a match between serena williams and kaja juvan. in august , meghan and her husband were criticized by environmental campaigners for using private jets regularly when taking their personal trips abroad, which would leave more carbon footprint per person compared to commercial planes. the criticism was in line with similar criticism faced by the royal family in june , after it was claimed that they had doubled their carbon footprint from business travel.

in september and october , a southern african tour included malawi, angola, south africa and botswana. archie traveled with his parents, making it their first official tour as a family. meghan completed  engagements in total in  and .

in january , meghan and harry returned to the uk from a vacation in canada and announced that they were stepping back from their role as senior members of the royal family and would balance their time between the united kingdom and north america. a statement released by the palace confirmed that the duke and duchess were to cease to undertake royal duties as representatives of the queen and would therefore no longer receive the relevant financial support. the couple would retain their hrh styles but not use them. the formal role of the duke and duchess was subject to a twelvemonth review period, ending in march . meghans final public solo engagement as a senior royal was a visit to robert clack school on march , , in dagenham ahead of international womens day. she and harry attended the commonwealth day service at westminster abbey on march , , which was their last engagement as a couple before they officially stepped down on march . two years later, they made their first official appearance in the uk in june  while attending the platinum jubilee national service of thanksgiving.they visited the uk and germany in september  for a number of charity events in manchester and dsseldorf. on september , , while meghan and harry were in london preparing to attend a charity event, queen elizabeth ii died at balmoral castle in scotland.

in summer , before announcing their decision to step down in january , meghan and her husband were involved in talks with jeffrey katzenberg, the founder of the nowdefunct streaming platform quibi, over a possible role in the service without gaining personal profits, but they eventually decided against joining the project. in september , it was reported that the couple had hired new yorkbased pr firm sunshine sachs, which represented them until . the couple has also been associated with adam lillings plus capital, a venture capital fund designed to connect early stage companies with influencers and investors. in june , they signed with the harry walker agency, owned by media company endeavor, to conduct paid public speaking engagements. in september , the sussexes signed a private commercial deal with netflix. in december , it was announced that meghan had invested in clevr blends, a coffee company based in southern california. in the same month, meghan and harry signed a multiyear deal with spotify to produce and host their own programs through their audio producing company, archewell audio. a holiday special was released by the couple on the service in december , while meghans podcast, titled archetypes, premiered in august . in june , spotify cancelled the podcast, which ran for a single season of  episodes.the bench, a picture book written by meghan, was published in june  by random house childrens books. it is based on her perception of the relationship between her husband and their son. the book received a mixed response; it garnered praise for its illustrations and messaging but was criticized for its structure and writing. on june , the book reached number one in the childrens picture books category of the new york times best seller list. in july , it was announced that meghan would executive produce, alongside david furnish, a netflix animated series called pearl. the series was originally pitched to netflix in . pearl would depict the adventures of a yearold girl who is inspired by influential women from history, but the project was canceled in may . in the same month, it was reported that meghan and harry had signed a fourbook publishing deal including a wellness guide by meghan and a memoir by harry.in october , meghan and harry announced their partnership with ethic, a sustainable investment firm based in new york city, which also manages the couples investments. according to state filings from delaware, where the couples archewell foundation is registered, meghan and harry incorporated  companies and a trust beginning in early  which include orinoco publishing llc and peca publishing llc to hold the rights for their books as well as cobblestone lane llc and iphw llc which are holders of their foundations logos. frim fram inc., which ran the tig, had been registered earlier as a new corporation in delaware in december .harry  meghan, a docuseries about the sussexes, was produced by netflix and the couples archewell productions and premiered on december , . it is directed by liz garbus. the series received mixed reviews. in april , it was announced that she had signed with wme, which would represent archewell as well.

markle became a counsellor for the international network one young world in  and spoke at its  summit in dublin and attended the  opening ceremony in ottawa. also in , she toured spain, italy, turkey, afghanistan and england with the united service organizations. during her time in toronto, she volunteered for the community meals program of st. felix centre and donated food from the set of suits.in , markle became a global ambassador for world vision canada, traveling to rwanda for the clean water campaign. after a trip to india focused on raising awareness for womens issues, she penned an oped for time magazine concerning stigmatization of women in regard to menstrual health. she has also worked with the united nations entity for gender equality and the empowerment of women as an advocate. her speech at the un womens  conference as an advocate for political participation and leadership contained a number of sentences that were nearly identical to a  speech by eleanor roosevelt. in , markle joined prince harry in teaming up with the charity elephants without borders to assist with the conservation efforts taking place in botswana.in january , markle became interested in the hubb community kitchen run by survivors of the grenfell tower fire. she visited the kitchen regularly and suggested that the displaced women publish a cookbook to assist in funding for the group. together our community cookbook, her first charity project as duchess of sussex, was announced in september. in august , meghan used proceeds from the cookbook to donate , to the uk charity migrateful, which supports refugees, asylum seekers and migrants by helping them organize cookery classes. in march , she donated , from the proceeds to the ukbased charity himmah to assist them with stocking the groups food bank, provide them with equipment and help the salaam shalom kitchen, the only muslim and jewish community kitchen in the uk.in march , it was announced that meghans first postroyal project would be the narration of disneynatures documentary elephant, which was released on april . in support of elephants, disneynature and the disney conservation fund would donate to elephants without borders for species conservation in botswana. in june , the couple backed the stop hate for profit campaign and encouraged ceos of different companies to join the movement. in july , she spoke in support of the black lives matter movement.

in april , the couple were announced as campaign chairs for vax live the concert to reunite the world, an event organized by global citizen to increase access to covid vaccinations. they also announced their support for a vaccine equity fundraiser initiated by the same organization, and penned an open letter to the pharmaceutical industry ceos urging them to address the vaccine equity crisis. in july , meghan and harry were among people who were selected by ukbased charity population matters to receive the change champions award for their decision to have only two children and help with maintaining a smaller and more sustainable population. in august , to mark her th birthday, meghan launched x, a campaign that asks people around the world to spend  minutes of their time mentoring women reentering the workforce. in october  and ahead of the  g rome summit, the couple penned an open letter together with the directorgeneral of the world health organization tedros adhanom, asking the g leaders to expedite efforts for the global distribution of covid vaccines.in february , the couple were selected to receive naacps presidents award for their work on causes related to social justice and equity. in the following month, they were among more than a hundred people who signed an open letter published by the peoples vaccine alliance, asking for free global access to covid vaccines and calling out the uk, eu and switzerland for opposing a waiver that would allow vaccine intellectual property protections to be lifted. in october , meghan and harry were named as ripple of hope award laureates for their work on racial justice, mental health and other social initiatives through their foundation archewell. in april , she was named as a recipient of the ms. foundation for womens women of vision award.

from january  to february , meghan was patron of londons national theatre and the association of commonwealth universities. she continued her role as the private patron of mayhew until . she remains a private patron of smart works. from march  to february , she was the vice president of the queens commonwealth trust.  until february , periodically, online qct chat sessions were conducted and uploaded to youtube for general public viewing. in october , along with other members of the royal family, meghan voiced a public health england announcement, for the every mind matters mental health program.in  meghan was a contributor and guest editor for the september issue of british vogue and highlighted the works of  women from different areas, who were described as forces for change. edward enninful, editorinchief of the british vogue, later revealed that the issue had become the fastestselling issue in the history of british vogue. in the same issue, it was announced that she had collaborated with a number of british fashion houses and stores to launch a capsule collection, called the smart set, in september  to benefit the charity smart works. the collection sought to help unemployed and disadvantaged women, through selling items on a oneforone basis, meaning an item is donated for each item purchased. taking advantage of the meghan markle effect , in  days the collection provided a years worth of clothes for the charity.

in february , markle and fianc harry attended the first annual forum of the royal foundation. after marriage, meghan became the foundations fourth patron alongside prince harry, prince william and his wife, catherine. in may , as a part of their heads together initiative, the duchess of sussex together with her husband and inlaws launched shout, a text messaging service for those who suffer from mental issues. in june , it was announced that harry and meghan would split from the charity and establish their own foundation. nevertheless, the couples would collaborate on mutual projects, such as the mental health initiative heads together. the following month, sussex royal the foundation of the duke and duchess of sussex was registered in england and wales. however, it was confirmed on february , , that sussex royal would not be used as a brand name for the couple,  following their step back from official life as working royals. on august , , the sussex royal foundation was renamed mwx foundation and dissolved the same day.in march , it was reported that the charity commission for england and wales was conducting a review of the sussex royal organization in a regulatory and compliance case regarding its conduct under charity law during dissolution. representatives for the couple claimed that sussex royal was managed by a board of trustees and that suggestion of mismanagement directed exclusively at the duke and duchess would be incorrect. the commission later concluded that the foundation did not act unlawfully, but criticized the board of directors for expending a substantial proportion of funds to setting up and closing the charity.in april , meghan and harry confirmed that an alternative foundation  would be called archewell. the name stems from the greek word arche, which means source of actionthe same word that inspired the name of their son. archewell was registered in the united states. its website was officially launched in october .

between  and , markle anonymously ran the blog the working actress, which detailed the pitfalls and triumphs of struggling to make it in hollywood. in , she founded her own lifestyle blog the tig, which posted  articles about food, fashion, beauty, travel and inspirational women. the viewing audience consisted primarily of the fans of markle and suits. promotion of the blog on other social media platforms targeted three million followers on instagram, , on facebook and , on twitter. in april , the tig closed. in january , she took all articles offline and deleted her social media accounts. it is estimated that markles social media activities annually earned her about , from endorsements and sponsorships. she was also known for socializing at soho house.markle became known through the tig for her fashion sense, releasing two fashion collections with canadian clothing company reitmans in  and . the lines were based on her personal style and that of her suits character. markle has cited emmanuelle alt as her style inspiration. in , she hosted usa networks video series power lunch with meghan markle in collaboration with lexus and eater, discussing the culinary inspirations of five different new york kitchens.markle was featured in the cover story for the october  issue of vanity fair and the december  issue of elle france. shortly after her engagement to prince harry in , she caused a surge of interest in scottish retailer strathberry after carrying one of its handbags to a public event. this was reported as an indication that her fashion choices would produce results similar to the kate middleton effect. after markle and prince harrys first appearance as a couple, brands mackage, birks, rr jewelers, crown jewelers and everlane noted an upswing in their website hits and sales. it was speculated that markles effect would be broader internationally because she already had a strong american appeal. consequently, the united states saw a boost in yellow gold jewelry sales in the first quarter of .in , tatler included meghan with other senior royal women on its list of britains best dressed people. following the announcement of her pregnancy, she appeared in a karen gee dress that resulted in the australian designers website crashing. fashion website netaporter ranked meghan as one of the best dressed women in . she was nominated for the  teen choice awards in the category choice style icon. in , british brand reiss reported a growth in profits after meghan was seen wearing a mini dress by them on international womens day. in , the black armani dress worn by meghan during her oprah interview was selected by the fashion museum, bath, as dress of the year . in the same year, she was featured in the cover story for the  fall fashion issue of the cut. there was controversy over her claim in the interview that she had been told at the premiere of the lion king that her marriage resulted in rejoicing in south africa similar to that seen at nelson mandelas release from prison in .in , time selected meghan as one of the  most influential people in the world and placed her on its shortlist for person of the year. her name appeared again on the listicle in  and she and her husband were featured on one of the magazines seven worldwide covers. in , the magazine named meghan and prince harry among the  most influential people on the internet. she was also chosen as one of the  most influential women in the united kingdom by british vogue magazine in ,  and . her influence was also recognized in both the  and  editions of powerlist, the  most influential britons of african and afrocaribbean descent. in , she was named as one of the  women changing the world over the past year by worth magazine. in the same year, variety named her as a stellar honoree for its power of women issue, and financial times included her on its list of  most influential women of . in december , meghan was found to be the second most disliked member of the british royal family by statistics and polling company yougov, behind her husbands uncle prince andrew. in march , the independent included her on its influence list . meghan and harrys exit from the royal family was satirized in a  episode of south park.

in november , the mailonline was criticized for running an article on markles family background titled  straight outta compton, which triggered a response from prince harrys communications secretary.  in october , meghan filed a lawsuit against associated newspapers limited , the publisher of the mail on sunday and mailonline over the publication of a letter she had sent to her father. thomas markle sr. had provided the publisher with excerpts of the letter after five of his daughters friends, including abigail spencer, referenced it in a people article. she subsequently received support from more than  female mps from different parties who in an open letter condemned the use of outdated, colonial undertones against her in some national media outlets. in may , the court dismissed claims of the tabloids alleged dishonesty and malice, as they were deemed either vague or irrelevant to the case. in february , the high court of justice found in a summary judgment that anls mail on sunday had invaded meghans privacy by publishing the letter, and she won her claim for misuse of private information and copyright infringement in may . she was given a , down payment on her . million legal fees as an interim payment, and pursuant to copyright law, her legal team asked for a frontpage statement by the mail on sunday and mailonline to acknowledge her legal victory.the court of appeal granted anl permission to appeal against the ruling. the appeal was subsequently launched by anl in november . meghan and harrys former communications secretary jason knaufwho had previously denied coauthoring the letter with meghangave a statement to the court of appeal, mentioning that meghan gave him briefing points to share with finding freedoms authors omid scobie and carolyn durand and that prince harry welcomed the suggestion that they should conceal their involvement, while they both discussed the book on a routine basis. anl had previously applied to use the book in their defense. knauf also revealed that meghan wondered whether she should refer to her father as daddy in the letter, as she believed in the unfortunate event that it leaked, it would pull at the heartstrings. meghan subsequently apologized to the court for not remembering the emails earlier, adding that the extent of the information knauf shared with the books authors was unknown to her. she also stated in her witness statement that she was unable to retrieve any text messages with mr knauf due to an automatic deletion system that had been installed on her devices in  for security reasons.in december , three senior appeal judges upheld the judgement of the high court against anl, prompting meghan to call for reform of the tabloid industry. in the same month, anls the mail on sunday and mailonline published a frontpage statement on boxing day acknowledging meghans victory, adding that there had been an agreement on financial remedies. in addition to covering a portion of meghans legal costs, the outlet agreed to pay her  in damages for invading her privacy and a confidential sum for infringing her copyright. they were also banned from naming meghans friends, who had spoken to people magazine about the letter in .

in november , the sun ran the headline harry girls on pornhub. the outlet denied any smear after it was revealed that the clips were illegally uploaded scenes from the tv series suits and not pornographic material. they subsequently apologized via an official statement in february . in february , a letter containing white powder and a racist note addressing markle was sent to st jamess palace, triggering counterterrorism and hate crime investigations by scotland yard. meghan and harry obtained a formal apology in may  from splash news for privacy invasion at their cotswolds residence. the couple had a legal warning issued to the press in general in january  after the publication of paparazzi photographs. in march , the couple took splash uk to court after meghan and her son were photographed without permission in canada during a private family outing. the case was settled later that year with splash uk agreeing to no longer take unauthorized photos of the family. the duke and duchess announced in april that they would no longer cooperate with the daily mail, the sun, daily mirror and daily express. they won an apology in october from american news agency x for taking photographs of their son at their home using drones.in march , itv news reported meghan had complained directly to itvs ceo about piers morgans comments on mental health following her interview with oprah winfrey. ofcom received over , complaints about the program including one from the duchess of sussex. in the same month, it was reported that an american private investigator unlawfully handed over personal details about meghan to the sun, including her social security number, cell phone number and address, when she first started dating prince harry in . meghan and her husband condemned the predatory practices of the british tabloids, while the sun stated that the investigator was instructed clearly in writing to act lawfully, and they did not use the information he provided for any unlawful practice.in july , meghan filed legal complaints against the times for two separate articles, with the first one covering an unproven allegation from robert laceys book that she had left an engagement in fiji for not being appointed by un women as a goodwill ambassador and the second one claiming that the duke and duchess of cambridge had refused to talk to prince harry after prince philips funeral due to fears of a potential leak. in january , the couple jointly filed a legal complaint against the times for an article reporting on archewell raising less than , in . in the same month, she complained to the bbc regarding their fivepart podcast harry, meghan and the media, in which the presenter amol rajan stated that meghan had apologized for misleading the court of appeal in her case against the mail on sunday. the bbc responded by issuing a statement on its corrections and clarifications website to emphasize that she had apologized to the court for not remembering email exchanges.in march , meghans halfsister, samantha markle, filed a defamation lawsuit against her in florida, accusing her of lying in the oprah interview and disseminating false statements via her communications secretary for the book finding freedom and sought damages in excess of ,. in june , meghans initial motion to dismiss the case was rejected by a judge following amendments made by samantha in her complaints. she filed a second motion in the same month. in addition to applying for the case to be dismissed, meghans lawyer also applied for the discovery process to be delayed, pending the outcome of the dismissal application. a florida judge later denied the application to halt the discovery process, but dismissed the lawsuit in march . in april , samantha refiled the lawsuit with an amended complaint that covered statements made by meghan in her netflix docuseries as well.between december  and january , more than , complaints were submitted to the independent press standards organisation  about a column by jeremy clarkson in the sun, in which he stated that he hated meghan on a cellular level and dreamed of the day when she is made to parade naked through the streets of every town in britain while the crowds chant, shame and throw lumps of excrement at her. on december , , conservative mp caroline nokes wrote to the suns editor, victoria newton, calling for action to be taken against clarkson. the letter was signed by more than  crossparty mps. on december , the sun issued an apology, stating columnists opinions are their own but they regret the publication of this article and are sincerely sorry. on the following day, a spokesperson for the duke and duchess of sussex described the apology as nothing more than a pr stunt. clarkson said his column was a reference to a scene from the television series game of thrones and he later revealed that he had emailed meghan and harry on christmas day  to apologise. a spokesperson for the couple said clarkson wrote solely to harry and the article was not an isolated incident. in february , ipso announced that it was launching an investigation about the article. in june , ipso concluded that the column was sexist and contained a pejorative and prejudicial reference to meghans sex, but it rejected complaints that the piece was inaccurate, meant to harass her or included discriminatory references on the grounds of race.

in , shortly before meghan and harry were due to be interviewed by oprah winfrey, valentine low reported in the times that meghans former communications secretary, jason knauf, complained in october  that her conduct at kensington palace had caused two personal assistants to quit and had undermined the confidence of a third employee, prompting an investigation by buckingham palace into the bullying allegations. the palace hired an external law firm to examine the claims, with ten aides reported to have cooperated with the review. criticism of meghan for twice wearing earrings gifted from saudi crown prince mohammed bin salman in , after he was accused of complicity in the assassination of jamal khashoggi, appeared at the same time. her representatives denied her awareness of the accusations against mohammed bin salman and said the times were being used by buckingham palace for a smear campaign against her.the television special oprah with meghan and harry was broadcast on cbs on march , . meghan spoke about her personal and royal life and public pressure. she claimed to have been contemplating suicide during her time as a working royal and complained of a lack of protection for her and her son while being part of the royal institution. there was a wide and polarized reaction to the interview.in an updated epilogue for the couples unauthorized biography, finding freedom by omid scobie and carolyn durand, the authors claimed that two of the individuals mentioned in knaufs email asked for any allegations made to hr about their experiences with meghan to be rescinded. speaking on behalf of the duchess in a bbc documentary, jenny afia, a lawyer who represented meghan in her case against anl, stated that the bullying allegations were just not true. in june , the times reported that the results from the inquiry made buckingham palace modify some of the policies and procedures in its hr department, but the report would not be published to ensure the privacy of those who took part in it.

in march , european consulting firm up reported on their discovery of , highly connected twitter accounts with more than two and a half million tweets in favor of meghan, most of which appeared to be bots carrying out coordinated attacks on royal correspondents who had reported negatively on her. in the same year, cnn had reported on research by hope not hate, stating that out of , abusive tweets directed at meghan in january and february , , came from a small group of trolls. in march , the royal family introduced new rules for followers commenting on its official social media accounts in response to the online abuse aimed at meghan and her sisterinlaw catherine.in october , twitter analytics service bot sentinel released their analysis of more than , tweets about the duke and duchess of sussex, as a result of which they found  accounts with a combined number of , followers that were possibly responsible for approximately  of the negative content posted about the couple. the report prompted an investigation by twitter. the company stated that it found no evidence of widespread coordination between the accounts and said that it had taken action against users who violated twitters conduct policy.bot sentinel also released three more reports in the following months, arguing that the accounts were part of a bot network and a similar network could be found on youtube. in january , the bbc named meghan and harry among people whose photos and videos were used in fake instant profits advertisements and bitcoinrelated investment schemes.among unfounded conspiracy theories spread on social media, including twitter and youtube, were claims that meghan had faked her pregnancies and used a surrogate mother, or, alternatively, that her children do not exist at all. meghans halfsister, samantha, was reported to have run multiple twitter accounts that targeted meghan and spread conspiracy theories about her.

meghan became a princess of the united kingdom upon her marriage to prince harry, entitled to the style of royal highness. after her marriage, she was styled her royal highness the duchess of sussex. she also holds the titles of countess of dumbarton and baroness kilkeel. she is the first person to hold the title duchess of sussex.following the duke and duchesss decision to step back from royal duties in , the couple agreed not to use the style of royal highness in practice, but they are still referred to as his/her royal highness in legal settings.

markle, meghan . a face without freckles... is a night without stars.

hrh the duchess of sussex, foreword, in the hubb community kitchen . together our community cookbook. ebury press. isbn . oclc . archived from the original on june , . retrieved september , .

meghan, the duchess of sussex . the bench. illustrated by christian robinson. random house childrens books. isbn .

markle, meghan . its all enough. darling magazine., republished online, november , .

markle, meghan . im more than an other. elle., republished online, december , .

markle, meghan . with fame comes opportunity, but also a responsibility. elle.

markle, meghan . how periods affect potential. time.

hrh the duchess of sussex . hrh the duchess of sussex introduces the september issue in her own words. vogue .

hrh the duchess of sussex . hrh the duchess of sussex shares a new smart works initiative. vogue .

meghan, the duchess of sussex . meghan, the duchess of sussex my conversation with gloria steinem. yahoo.

meghan, the duchess of sussex . the losses we share. the new york times. issn . archived from the original on november , .

meghan, the duchess of sussex . a letter on paid leave from meghan, the duchess of sussex. paid leave for all.

tedros adhanom ghebreyesus; prince harry, the duke of sussex; meghan, the duchess of sussex . meeting the covid vaccine commitments. world health organization. archived from the original on october , .

meghan, the duchess of sussex . a message from meghan, the duchess of sussex. mayhew.

shawn corey carter , known by his stage name  jayz, is an american rapper, record producer, and entrepreneur. known for his involvement in the creative and commercial success of numerous artists, he was named the greatest rapper of all time by billboard and vibe in . he is the founder and chairman of entertainment company roc nation, and was the president and chief executive officer of def jam recordings from  to .born and raised in new york city, jayz began his musical career in the late s; he cofounded the record label rocafella records in  and released his debut studio album reasonable doubt in , which was met with critical praise. he has went on to release twelve additional albums to further critical acclaim and commercial success, including the blueprint , the black album , american gangster , and  . he released the collaborative albums watch the throne with kanye west in  and everything is love with his wife beyonc in . jayz holds the record for the most numberone albums  of any solo artist on the billboard .through his business ventures, jayz became the first hiphop billionaire in . in , he founded rocawear, a clothing retailer. in , he founded / club, a luxury bar chain. both businesses grew to multimilliondollar corporations, enabling him to launch roc nation, a multidisciplinary entertainment agency in . in , he acquired the technology company aspiro and led the expansion of tidal, the companys media streaming service. as of , he is the wealthiest musical artist in the world with a net worth of us. billion.one of the worlds bestselling music artists with  million records sold, jayz has won  grammy awards, the tenthmost of all time and most awarded for any hip hop artist jointly with kanye west. he has been awarded the naacps presidents award, a primetime emmy award, a sports emmy award, been nominated for a tony award. ranked by billboard and rolling stone as one of the  greatest artists of all time, jayz was the first rapper to be inducted into the songwriters hall of fame and the first solo living rapper inducted in the rock and roll hall of fame. time named him one of the  most influential people in the world in .

shawn corey carter was born on december , , in brooklyn, new york city. he was raised in marcy houses, a public housing project in brooklyns bedfordstuyvesant neighborhood. his father, adnis reeves, abandoned the family, and jayz and his three older siblings were raised by his mother, gloria carter. reeves later met and reconciled with jayz prior to his fathers death in . jayz claims in his lyrics that in , at age , he shot his older brother in the shoulder for stealing his jewelry.he attended eli whitney high school and george westinghouse career and technical education high school, both in brooklyn, and then trenton central high school in trenton, new jersey. he did not graduate, dropping out during his sophomore year at trenton central high school. according to his interviews and lyrics, he sold crack cocaine and was shot at three times during this period. his former friend was sentenced to prison for possessing drugs and weapons.according to his mother, jayz used to wake up his siblings at night banging out drum patterns on the kitchen table. she bought him a boombox for his birthday, sparking his interest in music, and he began freestyling and writing lyrics. known as jazzy around the neighborhood, he later adopted the stage name jayz in homage to his mentor jazo.

jayz can be briefly heard on several of jazos early recordings in the late s and early s, including h. p. gets busy, the originators and hawaiian sophie. jayz became embroiled in several battles with rapper ll cool j in the early s. he first became known to a wide audience on the posse cut show and prove on the  big daddy kane album daddys home. jayz has been referred to as big daddy kanes hype man during this period, although kane explains that he did not fill the traditional hype man role, and was instead basically making cameo appearances on stage. when i would leave the stage to go change outfits, i would bring out jayz and positive k and let them freestyle until i came back to the stage.according to his second verse on  problems, released in , jayz was allegedly stopped by an nypd detective in  while en route to i, possibly for a search of drugs in his car. detection dogs were called, but another police car had passed; jayz was let go soon after. jayz appeared on a popular song by big l, da graveyard, and on mic geronimos time to build, which also featured early appearances by his former murder inc. colleagues ja rule and dmx in . his first official rap single was in my lifetime, which was released with an accompanying music video in . an unreleased music video was also produced for the bside i cant get with that.

with no major label to give him a record deal, jayz sold burned cds out of his car, and with damon dame dash and kareem biggs burke, created rocafella records as an independent label in . after striking a distribution deal with priority, jayz released his  debut album reasonable doubt with beats from acclaimed producers such as dj premier and super dj clark kent and an appearance by the notorious b.i.g. the album reached number  on the billboard , and was generally favored by critics. this album would later be included in rolling stones  greatest albums of all time as no.  and eventually reach platinum status. after reaching a new label distribution deal with def jam in , jayz released his followup in my lifetime, vol. . featuring production by sean puff daddy combs, dj premier, and ski, it earned platinum status in the united states.in , jayz released vol. ... hard knock life which spawned the biggest hit of his career at the time, hard knock life . he relied more on flow and wordplay, and he continued with his penchant for mining beats from the popular producers of the day such as swizz beatz, an upstart inhouse producer for ruff ryders, and timbaland. other producers included dj premier, erick sermon, the  king, and kid capri. charting hits from this album included can i get a..., featuring ja rule and amil, and nigga what, nigga who, featuring amil and jazo. vol.  would eventually become jayzs most commercially successful album; it was certified  platinum in the united states and has to date sold over five million copies. the album went on to win a grammy award, although jayz boycotted the ceremony protesting dmxs failure to garner a grammy nomination and the academys decision to not broadcast urban music categories. 

in , jayz collaborated with mariah carey on heartbreaker, a song from her seventh album, rainbow. the song became jayzs first charttopper in the us, spending two weeks atop the billboard hot . in that same year, jayz released vol. ... life and times of s. carter. the album proved successful and sold over  million copies. vol. s most successful single was big pimpin, featuring ugk.

in , jayz released the dynasty roc la familia, which was originally intended to become a compilation album for rocafella artists but def jam turned into a jayz album. the album helped to introduce newcomer producers the neptunes, just blaze, kanye west, and bink, which have all gone on to achieve notable success. this is also the first album where jayz utilizes a more soulful sound than his previous albums. the dynasty sold over two million units in the u.s. alone.

in , jayz spoke out against prodigy after he took an issue with a jayz line from money, cash, hoes that he felt alluded disparagingly to mobb deep and prodigys dispute with tupac shakur, snoop dogg, and death row records. he later performed the song takeover, at summer jam , which initially attacked prodigy and revealed photos of prodigy dressed like michael jackson. a line at the end of takeover referred to nas, who criticized him on we will survive. nas responded with a diss track called ether and jayz straightaway added a verse to takeover which dissed nas and would start a feud between the two rappers. the feud had ended by , jayz stated mark pitts had helped them settle the feud.on september , , jayz released his sixth studio album, the blueprint, which received a fivemic review from hiphop magazine the source. written in just two days, the album sold more than , copies, debuted at number one on the billboard  and reached  platinum status in the u.s. eminem featured on the album, producing and rapping on the song renegade. four tracks were produced by kanye west. the blueprint includes the songs izzo , girls, girls, girls, jigga that nigga, and song cry. as of february , the album had sold . million copies worldwide. in , the blueprint was selected by the library of congress for preservation in the national recording registry for being culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant.in october , jayz pleaded guilty to aggravated assault for stabbing record producer lance rivera at the kit kat klub in new york city in . for this seconddegree felony, jayz was sentenced to three years probation.in , jayz released his seventh studio album the blueprint the gift  the curse, a double album. the album debuted on the billboard  at number one, selling over  million units in the u.s. alone and surpassing the blueprint. it was later reissued in a singledisc version, the blueprint ., which retained half of the tracks from the original. the album spawned two hit singles, excuse me miss and  bonnie  clyde, which features jayzs wife, beyonc. the album also contained the tracks a dream, featuring faith evans and the late the notorious b.i.g..

after visiting the south of france, jayz announced work on his eighth studio album the black album at the opening of the / club. he worked with several producers including just blaze, the neptunes, kanye west, timbaland, eminem, dj quik, th wonder, the buchanans, and rick rubin. notable songs on the album included what more can i say, dirt off your shoulder, change clothes, and  problems. the black album has sold more than  million copies in the u.s. jayz collaborated with r. kelly and released a collaborative studio album, the best of both worlds.

on november , , jayz held a concertbilled as a retirement party at madison square garden in new york city, which would later be the focus of his film fade to black. all proceeds went to charity. other performers included collaborators like the roots , missy elliott, memphis bleek, beanie siegel, freeway, mary j. blige, beyonc, twista, ghostface killah, foxy brown, pharrell williams and r. kelly with special appearances by voletta wallace and afeni shakur, the mothers of the notorious b.i.g. and tupac shakur, respectively. while jayz had attested to a retirement from making new studio albums, various side projects and appearances soon followed. included in these were a greatest hits record, as well as the release and tour of unfinished business, the second collaborative album between jayz and r. kelly.

in , jayz collaborated with rock group linkin park, in which they released their collaborative remix ep collision course, which featured mashups of both artists songs, as well as a concert dvd. the albums only single, numb/encore, went on to win a grammy for best rap/sung collaboration, and was performed with linkin park live at the grammys, with a special appearance by paul mccartney, who added verses from the song yesterday. the ep sold over  million copies in the u.s. jayz was the executive producer of the rising tied, the debut album of fort minor, the hip hop side project of linkin park rapper mike shinoda. jayz also planned to retire in .later in , jayz was named president of def jam records, which led to jayz, dash and biggs selling their remaining interests in rocafella records and jayz taking control of both of the companies. reportedly this major industry move was prompted by disagreements between jayz and dash as to what direction rocafella could undertake. the publicized split between jayz, dash, and biggs led to the former partners sending jabs at each other in interviews.

on october , , jayz headlined new yorks power . annual concert, powerhouse. the concert was entitled the i declare war concert leading to intense speculation in the weeks preceding the event on whom exactly jayz would declare war. as he had previously declared war on other artists taking lyrical shots at him at other events, many believed that the powerhouse show would represent an allout assault by jayz upon his rivals. the theme of the concert was jayzs position as president and ceo of def jam, complete with an onstage mockup of the oval office. many artists made appearances such as the old roster of rocafella records artists, as well as neyo, teairra mar, t.i., young jeezy, akon, kanye west, paul wall, the lox, and diddy.at the conclusion of the concert, jayz put many arguments to rest to the surprise of hip hop fans. the most significant development in this show was closure to the infamous hip hop rivalry between jayz and nas. the two former rivals shook hands and shared the stage together to perform jayzs dead presidents blended with nass song the world is yours.jayz returned with his comeback album on november , , titled kingdom come. jayzs comeback single, show me what you got, was leaked on the internet in early october , scheduled to be released later on that month, received heavy airplay after its leak, causing the fbi to step in and investigate. jayz worked with video director hype williams, and the singles video was directed by f. gary gray. the album features production from just blaze, pharrell, kanye west, dr. dre and coldplays chris martin . the first week saw , sales of the cd, which entertainment weekly said was the highest singleweek total in jays decade long career. this album has sold  million copies in the u.s.jayz released his tenth album entitled american gangster on november , . after viewing the ridley scott film of the same name, jayz was heavily inspired to create a new concept album that depicts his experiences as a streethustler.

the album is not the films official soundtrack, although it was distributed by def jam.

jayzs american gangster depicts his life in correlation to the movie american gangster. at the start of the albums first single, blue magic, jayz offers a dealers manifesto while making references to political figures of the late s with the lyric blame reagan for making me to into a monster, blame oliver north and irancontra, i ran contraband that they sponsored, before this rhymin stuff we was in concert. also notable about the blue magic music video was jayz flashing  notes; harvard business school professor rawi abdelal called this a turning point in american pop cultures response to globalization. the album has sold  million copies in the u.s. on january , , jayz resigned as president of def jam.

in winter , it was announced that jayz would become the first major hip hop artist to headline britains glastonbury festival. tickets sold out quickly. former headliner noel gallagher of oasis condemned the festival organizers for choosing jayz to headline a traditionally guitardriven festival. im sorry, but jayz gallagher asked, swearing. no chance. glastonbury has a tradition of, kind of, guitar music, do you know what i mean and even when they throw the odd curve balls in on a sunday nightyou go, kylie minogue i dont know about that, do you know what i meanbut im not having hip hop at glastonbury, no way, no, no. its wrong. as controversy mounted, jayz replied, we dont play guitars, noel, but hip hop has put in its work like any other form of music. this headline show is just a natural progression. rap music is still evolving. we have to respect each others genre of music and move forward. jayz opened his glastonbury set with a tongueincheek cover of oasiss iconic song wonderwall, and went on to deliver a performance heralded as a successful response to prefestival criticism.he also headlined many other summer festivals in , including roskilde festival in denmark, hove festival in norway and o wireless festival in london. during kanye wests concert of august , , at madison square garden, jayz came out to perform a new song and he and west proclaimed that it was to be on the blueprint . on may , , jayz announced he would be parting ways with def jam, and had struck a multimilliondollar deal to sign with live nation, with whom he would start his roc nation imprint which would serve as a record label, talent/management agency, and music publishing company and also partnered with production team stargate to start a record label called starroc. jayzs th studio album the blueprint  was originally to be released on september , , but was instead released in north america on september , , due to increasing anticipation. its international release followed on september . it is his th album to reach no.  on the billboard  and has surpassed elvis presleys previous record, making him the current soloartist record holder. on october , , jayz kicked off his tour for the blueprint , during which he supported his new album in north america. in a shave magazine review of his performance at rexall place in edmonton, jake tomlinson expressed that it was the type of smooth performance you would expect from the hiphop superstar. the review gave this performance  stars. his north american tour continued until november , . at his concert on november , , at uclas pauley pavilion, rihanna joined him on stage and performed hard for the first time, then performed run this town with jayz. among his success, jayz has ventured into producing broadway shows. along with jada pinkett smith and will smith, jayz helped produce the play fela, a musical celebrating the work of the late nigerian star fela kuti. jayz said he was inspired by the power of kutis work and his life story, which resulted in his interest to help produce the musical. fela is a story about an african pioneer and political activist who made his first moves on the scene during the s.

on january , , jayz released a track, stranded , with rihanna, and us bono and the edge, as well as performing it at the hope for haiti now telethon. in june , eminem and jayz announced they would perform together in a pair of concerts in detroit and new york. the event was dubbed the home  home tour. the first two concerts rapidly sold out, prompting the scheduling of an additional show at each venue. jayz was the supporting act for u on the australian and new zealand leg of their u  tour, beginning in auckland, new zealand, in november , followed by melbourne, sydney, brisbane and perth in december. jayz also appeared on stage during u performances of sunday bloody sunday, and in auckland also on a fivetrack ep entitled watch the throne, although it was later revealed by west that the project had become a fulllength lp. recording sessions for the album took place at various recording locations and began in november . the first single released for the project was ham. the track was coproduced by lex luger and west himself. the track ended up being on the deluxe edition of the album. the followup to that was the second single otis, which premiered on funkmaster flexs hot  radio show, and was later released to the itunes store eleven days later. the songs existence, along with several other tracks from the album, was confirmed during a listening session hosted by jayz. the album was first released on the itunes store, five days prior to its being released in physical format, a strategy jayz later said was used to block an internet leak. it debuted at no.  on the itunes store in  countries. it also broke coldplays record for most albums sold in one week on the online retailer, selling , copies on itunes alone. it held that record until lil waynes tha carter iv was released twentyone days later, selling , copies more. it debuted on the u.s. billboard  chart at no. , selling , copies in its first week. the album received generally positive reviews. jayz and west later gave a surprise performance of otis at the  mtv video music awards.

jayz collaborated with m.i.a on her single xxxo, which achieved a fair level of success and went on to become remixed by several producers worldwide. in may , jayz and former philadelphia mayor michael a. nutter announced jayz as the curator and the headliner for the first annual budweiser made in america festival at fairmount park in philadelphia on september  and , . the performance was produced by live nation and assembled an eclectic lineup of rock, hip hop, rb, latin music and dance musicians. jayz and rihanna were the two main headlining acts for bbc radio s  hackney weekend music festival on june  to . jayz opened his set with an appearance from rihanna, they performed run this town. on september , clique was released, a single from the album cruel summer, by good music. kanye west and big sean starred alongside jayz on the track. jayz took the subway to his soldout show at the barclays center on october , . on november , , coldplay announced that they will be playing with jayz at the barclays center in brooklyn on december .on september , , qtip confirmed working on jayzs followup album to the blueprint , saying the album was to hit stores by spring . in may  it was reported that jayz would work on new music with roc nation producer jahlil beats. beats told xxl magazine me and jayz been going back and forth. he picked a couple of my joints that hes working on. i dont even wanna say too much about jay, but we definitely working on some stuff. i havent even sent him a bunch of beats. i sent him my favorite stuff. he hit me right back like, yo, ima go in on this, or, i like this. the album has been named one of the most anticipated albums of  by complex magazine, mtv, and xxl. production will come from jahlil beats, kanye west, rick rubin, swizz beatz, timbaland, and pharrell williams. jayz also made an appearance on justin timberlakes comeback single suit  tie from his third studio album the / experience, the song itself was produced by both jayz and timberlakes mutual friend, timbaland. timberlake and jayz embarked on the coheadlining legends of the summer stadium tour. during the fifth game of the  nba finals, carter announced his twelfth studio album, magna carta holy grail, and was released on july , . not long after, jayz confirmed that the hyphen in his stage name would be left out and officially stylized in all capital letters. magna carta holy grail debuted at number one on the billboard  and sold , copies in its first week, which bypassed its predicted debut in the range of , to ,.

in december , it was announced that jayz had received nine nominations at the  grammy awards, more than any other artist. jayz appeared on his wife beyoncs selftitled fifth studio album, beyonc, with a feature on the song drunk in love. they performed this song together at the th annual grammy awards opening. the song and its accompanying album would later win three grammy awards including best rb performance at the  ceremony.

in , he won a lawsuit for the song made in america with kanye west featuring frank ocean against joel mcdonald.

in early june , posters were displayed in new york city and los angeles, and banner ads were placed on the internet promoting a tidalrelated project titled . a teaser ad was aired during the nba finals on june  featuring actors mahershala ali, lupita nyongo and danny glover in a oneminute video, ending in   .., exclusively on tidal. on june , the project was confirmed to be a new jayz album, and a clip featuring a song titled adnis was posted on sprints youtube page. was released through roc nation and universal music group, as an exclusive to sprint and tidal customers. the album is the first in a planned series of music exclusives from the sprinttidal partnership. for a short time, on july , the album was made available for free digital download in tidals site. a physical edition was released on july , including three additional tracks. on the same day, the album was made available to other streaming platforms, such as apple music, google play music and amazon music.

the album received widespread acclaim from critics, who praised its emotional and personal content. on july , the album was certified platinum by the recording industry association of america , in recognition of one million copies purchased by sprint and offered to consumers as free downloads. it debuted at number one on the u.s. billboard , making it jayzs th consecutive studio album to top the chart. the album spawned two singles, the title track  and bam, as well as several music videos, directed by a variety of highprofile collaborators. the album received a grammy award nomination for album of the year, while the title track was nominated for song of the year and the story of o.j. was nominated for record of the year at the th annual grammy awards.on june , , jayz and beyonc kickedoff the on the run ii tour in cardiff, united kingdom. ten days later, at their final london performance, the pair unveiled everything is love, their muchawaited joint studio album, credited under the name the carters. the pair also released the video for the albums lead single, apeshit, on beyoncs official youtube channel. the song won two awards from eight nominations at the  mtv video music awards.in , jayz was inducted into the rock and roll hall of fame along with fellow rapper ll cool j. he also appeared on the song jail on kanye wests  album donda, which went on to win grammy award for best rap song at the th annual grammy awards and on the song love all from drakes  album certified lover boy.in , his first feature was a collaboration with fellow rapper pusha t, neck  wrist featuring pharrell williams from pusha ts album, its almost dry. his feature was succeeded by a fourminute guest appearance on dj khaleds album title track, god did. he also was awarded the primetime emmy award for outstanding variety special , as a producer for the super bowl lvi halftime show.

jayz says his earliest exposure to music was through his parents record collection, which was mostly of soul artists such as marvin gaye and donny hathaway. he says i grew up around music, listening to all types of people... im into music that has soul in it, whether it be rap, rb, pop music, whatever. as long as i can feel their soul through the wax, thats what i really listen to. he often uses excerpts from these artists as samples in his work, particularly in the kanye west productions included on the blueprint.

royce da  and fredro starr of onyx both describe jayzs emphasis on flow in the book how to rapstarr says that jayz is a master of the flowhe can flow fast, he can flow slow. the book describes how jayz uses rests to provide structure to a verse and how he uses partial linking to add more rhymes to a verse. jayzs early style is described by vibe as a distinctly das efxtype, stiggety style on his  single cant get with that, referring to the fast rhythms and vocal delivery of the group das efx. he is also known to write lyrics in his head, as described by pusha t of clipse in how to rap, a style popular with many mcs such as the notorious b.i.g., everlast, bobby creekwater and guerilla black. shock g of digital underground describes jayzs live performance style, saying he rarely breaks a sweat, and instead uses smoothness and clever wordplay to keep the audience interested and entertained. jayzs fast rapping technique, also known as the triplet rhyme, was developed during his early years of creating music with former mentor jazo.

jayz has also established himself as a successful entrepreneur with a business empire spanning a variety of industries from clothing lines, beverages, real estate, sport teams, and record labels. in an interview, he stated that my brands are an extension of me. theyre close to me. its not like running gm, where theres no emotional attachment.

jayz and damon dash are the founders of the urban clothing brand rocawear. rocawear has clothing lines and accessories for men, women and children. the line was taken over by jayz in early  following a falling out with dash. in march , jayz sold the rights to the rocawear brand to iconix brand group for  million. he retains his stake in the company and continues to oversee the marketing, licensing and product development.

jayz became the first rapper in reeboks history to endorse the companys footwear, signing a threeyear endorsement deal. he later appeared in a  reebok collection advertising his s. carter collection. later that year, he and frenemy  cent appeared in a commercial to promote their s. carter and gunit footwears for the company, with a just blazeproduced song made for it.in , jayzs deal with reebok expired with no renewal.

in , jayz invested  million in armand de brignac champagneowned at the time by sovereign brands, a new yorkbased wine and spirits companyfor a  percent stake, making it the second alcoholic product acquisition in his financial investment portfolio. the brand is known for its popularity with highprofile artists as being the gold bottles often referred to in media. his ties to the company date back to , and he received millions of dollars per year for his association with armand de brignac before he bought the entire company.jayz serves as cobrand director for budweiser select and collaborates with the company on strategic marketing programs and creative ad development. he provides direction on brand programs and ads that appear on tv, radio, print, and highprofile events.

in march , jayz completed the  million acquisition of aspiro, a norwegian media technology company that operates the subscriptionbased music streaming service tidal, which has been in operation since october . the music service was acquired through his company project panther bidco ltd. . the music service combines audio and music videos with curated editorial. the main idea of the service is to bring major revenue streams back to the music artists themselves as the idea of an artistowned streaming platform was stated as to restore the value to music by launching a service owned by artists. jayz currently is a major shareholder in the company.in july , carter made a significant investment to jetsmarter, an app helping people book private executive plane flights. the app was built by sergey petrossov.

from  to  jayz was president of def jam recordings. under jayzs leadership, def jam launched the successful careers of contemporary rb singers rihanna and neyo. at the end of , after he released american gangster, jayz decided not to renew his contract as the president and ceo of def jam in order to start his new live nation venture, roc nation.in april , it was reported that jayz had outbid executives at universal music and jive records to acquire independent record label block starz music.

for a decade , jayz enjoyed his role as a partowner of the brooklyn nets nba team, having paid a reported  million for his share, which declined in value to , in april , based on forbes magazines valuation of the team. he encouraged the teams relocation to brooklyns barclays center  in the  season, at which point the team took on the brooklyn nets moniker.on april , , jayz officially announced through his life  times website in a press release that he would be relinquishing his ownership in the brooklyn nets. the shares were eventually sold to singer, rapper, actor and entrepreneur will pan, making pan the first american of taiwanese descent to own a u.s. professional sports franchise. jayzs cited pans athletic background , his multitude of musical styles, his influence in the taiwanese american community, and his business acumen and portfolio , as reasons why his bid was successful.in september , his stake in barclays center was sold for . million.on april , , espn reported jayzs plans to launch his own sports agency, roc nation sports, with a focus on the representation of various professional athletes. the sport management group is a partnership with creative artists agency.  in conjunction with the agencys launch, new york yankeess second baseman robinson can left agent scott boras to sign with the company. espn also mentioned that jayz himself was planning to be a certified sports agent, first in baseball and eventually in basketball and football. in order to represent clients in basketball, he would have to give up his small share of the brooklyn nets.in october , he was reported in english media as considering buying a stake of arsenal f.c., an english soccer team. through his conglomerate company gain global investments network llc, he had an interest estimated between  and  in the aqueduct entertainment group  consortium, which in january  was awarded a contract to operate a ,slotmachine racino at the aqueduct race track. jayz became interested in the project after new york governor david paterson who awarded the contract said there had to be an affirmative action component to the ownership. jayz was initially approached by casino mogul steve wynn, who was also bidding on the contract. on march , , jayz and flake withdrew from the project, and paterson recused himself from further involvement.

on april , , jayz launched the popular culture and lifestyle online magazine life  times. it features content that showcases his highend tastes in clothing, appliances, and cars. the site design is aesthetically aimed at the upwardly mobile young male demographic, with sports and musicrelated posts accompanying those about fashion and design. among the music content is the decoded series, originating from jayzs memoir of the same name and featuring a select rapper deciphering their own lyrics.in january , after being contacted by the webzine, the dj and radio host funkmaster flex revealed that he had been contacted in  for a story about a digital app he made at the time, but alleged that the information was instead used to help launch the magna carta samsung app for the release of jayzs album of the same name. but i was good with that. i ate that. everybodys out here hustling, flex reasoned to vibe.in , he signed a twoyear exclusive film and tv deal with weinstein company and with the deal gives them firstlook options to create scripted and unscripted tv projects and film projects, and those projects were in works. as part of his deal with weinstein company, he produced a documentary series on the life of kalief browder who was imprisoned for three years and committed suicide upon his release. he also addressed racial profiling and police brutality in a conscious manner.

jayz also coowns the / club, an upscale sports bar that started in new york city, and has since expanded to atlantic city and chicago. in , the / club in las vegas was closed down and bought back by the hotel after attendance steadily declined. in , jayz became an investor in carols daughter, a line of beauty products, including products for hair, skin, and hands.in , he announced plans to expand his / club sports bar chain into as many as  airports, joining his roc nation business partners, husband and wife juan and desiree perez, in a deal with delaware north.on november , , jayz published a memoir entitled decoded. the memoir was cosigned by dream hampton.parlux fragrances sued jayz for  million for the failure of his cologne, gold. they claim the colognes failure is due to jayz not doing social media posts and interviews about the cologne. parlux claims they projected selling  million the first year, and  million the second, and subsequent years after the launch. the fragrance sold  million the first year and . million the second. parlux lost money on the venture and have had constant returns of unsold inventory.jayz collaborated with cohiba to launch his own cigars.in august , jayzs roc nation partnered with brooklyns long island university to establish the roc nation school of music, sports  entertainment.in november , it was announced that jayz would be join tpco holding corp., a newly formed cannabis products company, in the role of chief visionary officer.on december , , jayz and the roc nation announced their partnership with caesars entertainment to build and operate a casino property at times square.

in , jayz and singer beyonc collaborated on the song  bonnie  clyde. he also appeared on beyoncs hit single, crazy in love the following year, as well as the song thats how you like it from her debut album dangerously in love . on her second album, bday, he made appearances on the hits dj vu and upgrade u. in the video for the latter song, she comically imitates his appearance. they kept a low profile while dating, and were married on april , , in a private ceremony in tribeca, new york city. their relationship became a matter of public record on april , , although beyonc did not publicly debut her us million lorraine schwartzdesigned wedding ring until the fashion rocks concert on september , . since their marriage, they generally avoid discussing their relationship, and beyonc has stated her belief that this has helped them, while jayz agreed in a people article that they do not play with their relationship.in , beyonc and jayz were listed as the most powerful couple for time magazines  most influential people. in january , forbes ranked them as hollywoods topearning couple, with a combined total of  million. they made it to the top of the list the following year, with a combined total of us million between june  and june .at the  mtv video music awards, beyonc revealed that she was pregnant with their first child. their daughter, blue ivy carter, was born at new yorks lenox hill hospital on january , . jayz released glory, a song dedicated to blue ivy, through his lifetimes website on january , . the song, produced by frequent collaborators the neptunes, detailed the couples pregnancy struggles, including a miscarriage beyonc had suffered. blue ivys cries were included at the end of the song, and she was officially credited on the song as b.i.c; she became the youngest person in billboard history  have a chart entry when glory debuted at no.  on hot rb/hiphop songs.on june , , beyoncs father mathew knowles confirmed that she had given birth to twins with jayz, a daughter named rumi and a son named sir. in the following months, they purchased an us million home in the bel air neighborhood of los angeles.in , the couple bought  pacific coast highway, a house in malibu, california designed by the architect tadao ando, for us million. the purchase established a record for the most expensive residence sold in the states history.

on december , , jayz, who had come to believe that record executive lance un rivera was behind the bootlegging of vol. ..., allegedly stabbed him at the kit kat klub, a nowdefunct night club in times square, new york city, during a release party for qtips album amplified. jayzs associates at the party were accused of causing a commotion within the club, which jayz allegedly used as cover while he stabbed rivera in the stomach with a fiveinch  blade. he surrendered to police the following evening and was placed under arrest, although he was soon released on , bail. when he was indicted in manhattan criminal court in late january , he pleaded not guilty; he and his lawyers contended that they had witnesses and videotapes proving he had been nowhere near rivera during the incident. nevertheless, he later pleaded guilty to thirddegree assault and accepted a threeyear probation sentence.jayz later addressed the case in his  book decoded

one night i went to qtips solo album release party and at some point in the night, i ran into the guy everyones been telling me is behind the bootleg. so i approached him. when i told him what i suspected, to my surprise, he got real loud with me right there in the middle of the club. it was strange. we separated and i went over to the bar. i was sitting there like, no the fuck this nigga did not... i was talking to people, but i was really talking to myself out loud, just in a state of shock. before i even realized what i was doing, i headed back over to him, but this time i was blacking out with anger. the next thing i knew, all hell had broken loose in the club. that night the guy went straight to the police and i was indicted. ... there was no reason to put my life on the line, and the lives of everyone who depends on me, because of a momentary loss of control. ... i vowed to never allow myself to be in a situation like that again.

during his first retirement from music, jayz became involved in philanthropy. in , along with his mother, jayz founded the shawn carter foundation, which assists eligible students facing socioeconomic hardships attend and get through college. in august , he met with kofi annan, then secretarygeneral of the united nations at the organizations new york city headquarters, where he pledged to use his upcoming world tour to raise awareness of the global water shortage, a challenge he learned about following a visit to africa by bono, the lead singer of u. the effort took place in partnership with the un, as well as mtv, which produced a documentary entitled diary of jayz water for life, first airing in november . along with sean diddy combs, jayz pledged  million to the american red crosss relief effort after hurricane katrina. jayz supported kanye west after wests outburst against president george w. bush during a live katrina charity telethon. he also addressed the katrina disaster and the federal governments response in his oneverse song minority report.jayz has said that the greatest form of giving is anonymous to anonymous. in , author dream hampton, who cowrote jayzs book decoded, revealed that jayz had established a trust fund for sean bells children.jayz donated to bail out protestors arrested during  activism against police brutality.in march , jayz donated  million through the shawn carter foundation to aid in relief during the covid pandemic in new york. in april , along with meek mill, he donated over , face masks to u.s. prisons to assist in protecting prison inmates from covid.

in , jayz appeared with russell simmons in a public service announcement denouncing racism and antisemitism, sponsored by the foundation for ethnic understanding. in , jayz was  involved in the  united states presidential election, supporting enhanced voter participation. he supported the  presidential candidacy of barack obama and performed voterdrive concerts financed by the democrats campaign. he also became acquainted with obama, who in june  said, every time i talk to jayz, who is a brilliant talent and a good guy, i enjoy how he thinks. thats somebody who is going to start branching out and can help shape attitudes in a real positive way.during the  midterm elections, jayz appeared with other artists in a headcount advertisement, urging voters, especially younger ones, to register and vote. in may , jayz endorsed president obamas support of samesex marriage and participated in his reelection campaign.musician and civil rights activist harry belafonte has been critical of jayz and beyonc in their safe political stances, saying that they have turned their back on social responsibility he also voiced that the hiphop mogul likely would never have come out in support of gay marriage had president obama not first taken the initiative.in the  u.s. presidential election, jayz and beyonc appeared at a hillary clinton rally in cleveland. clinton praised jayz for addressing racism, oppression, and the criminal justice system. he described donald trump as a superbug and condemned remarks he perceived as racist, but later said that trumps rhetoric forced people to come together and address difficult issues such as white privilege.

studio albums

collaborative albums

streets is watching 

backstage 

state property 

paper soldiers 

paid in full 

fade to black 

the great gatsby 

made in america 

annie 

rest in power the trayvon martin story 

teddy 

reasonable doubt tour 

hard knock life tour 

blueprint lounge tour 

hangar tour 

american gangster live 

jayz fall tour/blueprint  tour 

magna carter world tour 

 tour 

rock the mic  

best of both worlds tour  

heart of the city tour  

jayz  ciara live  

the home  home tour  

watch the throne tour  

legends of the summer stadium tour  

on the run tour  

on the run ii tour  

no way out tour  

projekt revolution  europe  

viva la vida tour  

u  tour  

decoded by jayz , isbn . part memoir and part a collection of jayz lyrics with the stories behind them.

in , he was enstooled as the sarkin waka of kwara in the nigerian chieftaincy system.

the wreck of the titanic lies at a depth of about , feet , about  nautical miles  southsoutheast off the coast of newfoundland. it lies in two main pieces about , feet  apart. the bow is still recognisable with many preserved interiors, despite deterioration and damage sustained hitting the sea floor. in contrast, the stern is completely ruined. a debris field around the wreck contains hundreds of thousands of items spilled from the ship as she sank. the bodies of the passengers and crew would have also been distributed across the sea bed, but have since been consumed by other organisms.

the titanic sank in , when she collided with an iceberg during her maiden voyage. numerous expeditions unsuccessfully tried using sonar to map the sea bed in the hope of finding the wreckage. in , the wreck was finally located by a joint frenchamerican expedition led by jeanlouis michel of ifremer and robert ballard of the woods hole oceanographic institution. the wreck has been the focus of intense interest and has been visited by numerous tourist and scientific expeditions, including by the submersible titan, which imploded near the wreck in june , killing all five aboard.

controversial salvage operations have recovered thousands of items from the titanic, which have been conserved and put on public display. many schemes have been proposed to raise the wreck, including filling it with pingpong balls, injecting it with , tons of vaseline, or using half a million tons of liquid nitrogen to encase it in an iceberg that would float to the surface. however, the wreck is too fragile to be raised and is protected by a unesco convention.

almost immediately after the titanic sank on  april , proposals were advanced to salvage  it from its resting place in the north atlantic ocean, despite her exact location and condition being unknown. the families of several wealthy victims of the disaster  the guggenheims, astors, and wideners  formed a consortium and contracted the merritt and chapman derrick and wrecking company to raise the titanic. the project was soon abandoned as impractical as the divers could not even reach a significant fraction of the necessary depth, where the pressure is over , pounds per square inch , about  standard atmospheres. the lack of submarine technology at the time as well as the outbreak of world war i also put off such a project. the company considered dropping dynamite on the wreck to dislodge bodies which would float to the surface, but finally gave up after oceanographers suggested that the extreme pressure would have compressed the bodies into gelatinous lumps. in fact, this was incorrect. whale falls, a phenomenon not discovered until coincidentally, by the same submersible used for the first crewed expedition to the titanic the year beforedemonstrate that waterfilled corpses, in this case cetaceans, can sink to the bottom essentially intact. the high pressure and low temperature of the water would have prevented significant quantities of gas forming during decomposition, preventing the bodies of titanic victims from rising back to the surface.in later years, numerous proposals were put forward to salvage the titanic. however, all fell afoul of practical and technological difficulties, a lack of funding and, in many cases, a lack of understanding of the physical conditions at the wreck site. charles smith, a denver architect, proposed in march  to attach electromagnets to a submarine which would be irresistibly drawn to the wrecks steel hull. having found its exact position, more electromagnets would be sent down from a fleet of barges which would winch the titanic to the surface. an estimated cost of us. million  and its impracticality meant that the idea was not put into practice. another proposal involved raising the titanic by means of attaching balloons to her hull using electromagnets. once enough balloons had been attached, the ship would float gently to the surface. again, the idea got no further than the drawing board.

in the mids, a hosiery worker from baldock, england, named douglas woolley devised a plan to find the titanic using a bathyscaphe and raise the wreck by inflating nylon balloons that would be attached to her hull. the declared objective was to bring the wreck into liverpool and convert it to a floating museum. the titanic salvage company was established to manage the scheme and a group of businessmen from west berlin set up an entity called titanictresor to support it financially. the project collapsed when its proponents found they could not overcome the problem of how the balloons would be inflated in the first place. calculations showed that it could take ten years to generate enough gas to overcome the water pressure.a variety of proposals to salvage the ship were made during the s. one called for , tons of molten wax  to be pumped into the titanic, lifting her to the surface. another proposal involved filling the titanic with pingpong balls, but overlooked the fact that the balls would be crushed by the pressure long before reaching the depth of the wreck. a similar idea involving the use of benthos glass spheres, which could survive the pressure, was scuppered when the cost of the number of spheres required was put at over  million. an unemployed haulage contractor from walsall named arthur hickey proposed to encase the titanic inside an iceberg, freezing the water around the wreck in a buoyant jacket of ice. the ice, being less dense than liquid water, would float to the surface and could be towed to shore. the boc group calculated that this would require half a million tons of liquid nitrogen to be pumped down to the sea bed. in his  thriller raise the titanic, author clive cusslers hero dirk pitt repairs the holes in the titanics hull, pumps it full of compressed air and succeeds in making it leap out of the waves like a modern submarine blowing its ballast tanks, a scene depicted on the posters of the subsequent film of the book. although this was an artistically stimulating highlight of the film, made using a foot  model of the titanic, it would not have been physically possible. at the time of the books writing, it was still believed that the titanic sank in one piece.

robert ballard of the woods hole oceanographic institution had long been interested in finding the titanic. despite early negotiations with possible backers being abandoned when it emerged that they wanted to turn the wreck into souvenir paperweights, more sympathetic backers joined ballard to form a company named seasonics international ltd. as a vehicle for rediscovering and exploring the titanic. in october , he made his first attempt to find the ship with the aid of the alcoa corporations deep sea salvage vessel seaprobe. this was essentially a drillship with sonar equipment and cameras attached to the end of the drilling pipe. it could lift objects from the seabed using a remotecontrolled mechanical claw. the expedition ended in failure when the drilling pipe broke, sending , feet  of pipe and us,  worth of electronics plunging to the sea bed.in , the walt disney company and national geographic magazine considered mounting a joint expedition to find the titanic, using the aluminium submersible aluminaut. the titanic would have been well within the submersibles depth limits, but the plans were abandoned for financial reasons.the next year, the british billionaire financier and tycoon sir james goldsmith set up seawise  titanic salvage ltd. with the involvement of underwater diving and photographic experts. his aim was to use the publicity of finding the titanic to promote his newly established magazine, now. an expedition to the north atlantic was scheduled for  but was cancelled due to financial difficulties. a year later, now folded after  issues with goldsmith incurring huge financial losses.fred koehler, an electronics repairman from coral gables, florida, sold his electronics shop to finance the completion of a twoman deepsea submersible called seacopter. he planned to dive to the titanic, enter the hull and retrieve a fabulous collection of diamonds rumoured to be contained in the pursers safe. however, he was unable to obtain financial backing for his planned expedition. another proposal involved using a semisubmersible platform mounted with cranes, resting on two watertight supertankers, that would winch the wreck off the seabed and carry it to shore.

on  july , an expedition sponsored by texan oilman jack grimm set off from port everglades, florida, in the research vessel h.j.w. fay. grimm had previously sponsored expeditions to find noahs ark, the loch ness monster, bigfoot, and the giant hole in the north pole predicted by the pseudoscientific hollow earth hypothesis. to raise funds for his titanic expedition, he obtained sponsorship from friends with whom he played poker, sold media rights through the william morris agency, commissioned a book, and obtained the services of orson welles to narrate a documentary. he acquired scientific support from columbia university by donating , to the lamontdoherty geological observatory for the purchase of a widesweep sonar, in exchange for five years use of the equipment and the services of technicians to support it. drs. william b. f. ryan of columbia university and fred spiess of scripps institution of oceanography in california joined the expedition as consultants. the expedition was almost cancelled when grimm asked them to use a monkey trained to point at a spot on the map to supposedly indicate where the titanic was. the scientists issued an ultimatum its either us or the monkey. grimm preferred the monkey, but was prevailed upon to take the scientists instead.the results were inconclusive, as three weeks of surveying in almost continuous bad weather during july and august  failed to find the titanic. the problem was exacerbated by technological limitations; the sea marc sonar used by the expedition had a relatively low resolution and was a new and untested piece of equipment. it was nearly lost only  hours after it was first deployed when the tail was ripped off during a sharp turn, destroying the magnetometer, which would have been vital for detecting the titanics hull. nonetheless, it surveyed an area of some  square nautical miles  and identified  possible targets.  a documentary of this expedition, featuring welles, was titled search for the titanic .grimm mounted a second expedition in june  aboard the research vessel gyre, with spiess and ryan again joining the expedition. to increase their chances of finding the wreck, the team employed a much more capable sonar device, the scripps deep tow. the weather was again very poor, but all  of the targets were successfully covered and found to be natural features. on the last day of the expedition, an object that looked like a propeller was found. grimm announced on his return to boston that the titanic had been found, but the scientists declined to endorse his identification.  a documentary of this expedition, featuring james drury, was titled return to the titanic . this and the previous film were later combined into a single production, in search of titanic .

in july , grimm went back a third time with ryan aboard the research vessel robert d. conrad. nothing was found and bad weather brought an early end to the expedition. although they did not know it at the time, the sea marc had passed over the titanic but failed to detect it, while deep tow had passed within  nautical miles  of the wreck.

d. michael harris and jack grimm failed to find the titanic but their expeditions did succeed in producing fairly detailed mapping of the area in which the ship sank. it was clear that the position given in the titanics distress signals was inaccurate, which was a major expedition difficulty because it increased the search areas alreadyexpansive size. despite the failure of his  expedition, ballard had not given up hope and devised new technologies and a new search strategy to tackle the problem. the new technology was a system called argo / jason. this consisted of a remotely controlled deepsea vehicle called argo, equipped with sonar and cameras and towed behind a ship, with a robot called jason tethered to it that could roam the sea floor, take closeup images and gather specimens. the images from the system would be transmitted back to a control room on the towing vessel where they could be assessed immediately. although it was designed for scientific purposes, it also had important military applications and the united states navy agreed to sponsor the systems development, on condition that it was to be used to carry out a number of programmesmany still classifiedfor the navy.the navy commissioned ballard and his team to carry out a monthlong expedition every year for four years, to keep argo / jason in good working condition. it agreed to ballards proposal to use some of the time to search for the titanic once the navys objectives had been met; the search would provide an ideal opportunity to test argo / jason. in  the navy sent ballard and argo to map the wrecks of the sunken nuclear submarines uss thresher and uss scorpion, lost in the north atlantic at depths of up to , ft . the expedition found the submarines and made an important discovery about how shipwrecks behave as they sink. as thresher and scorpion sank, debris spilled out from them across a wide area of the seabed and was sorted by the currents, so that light debris drifted furthest away from the site of the sinking. this debris field was far larger than the wrecks themselves. by following the cometlike trail of debris, the main pieces of wreckage could be found.a second expedition to map the wreck of scorpion was mounted in . only twelve days search time would be left at the end of the expedition to look for the titanic. as harris/grimms unsuccessful efforts had taken more than forty days, ballard decided that extra help would be needed. he approached the french national oceanographic agency, ifremer, with which woods hole had previously collaborated. the agency had recently developed a highresolution sidescan sonar called sar and agreed to send a research vessel, le surot, to survey the sea bed in the area where the titanic was believed to lie. the idea was for the french to use the sonar to find likely targets, and then for the americans to use argo to check out the targets and hopefully confirm whether they were in fact the wreck. the french team spent five weeks, from  july to  august , mowing the lawn  sailing back and forth across the squarenauticalmile  target area to scan the sea bed in a series of stripes. however, they found nothing; though it turned out that they had passed within a few hundred yards of the titanic in their first run.ballard realised that looking for the wreck itself using sonar was unlikely to be successful and adopted a different tactic, drawing on the experience of the surveys of thresher and scorpion; he would look for the debris field instead, using argos cameras rather than sonar. while sonar could not distinguish humanmade debris on the sea bed from natural objects, cameras could. the debris field would also be a far bigger target, stretching one nautical mile  or longer, whereas the titanic itself was only  feet  wide. the search required roundtheclock towing of argo back and forth above the sea bed, with shifts of watchers aboard the research vessel knorr looking at the camera pictures for any sign of debris. after a weeks fruitless searching, at  am on sunday  september , pieces of debris began to appear on knorrs screens. one of them was identified as a boiler, identical to those shown in pictures from . the following day, the main part of the wreck was found and argo sent back the first pictures of the titanic since her sinking  years before. the discovery made headlines around the world.

following his discovery of the wreck site, ballard returned to the titanic in july  aboard the research vessel rv atlantis ii. now the deepdiving submersible dsv alvin could take people back to the titanic for the first time since her sinking, and the remotely operated vehicle jason jr. would allow the explorers to investigate the interior of the wreck. another system, angus, was used to carry out photo surveys of the debris field. jason jr. descended the ruined grand staircase as far as b deck, and photographed remarkably wellpreserved interiors, including some chandeliers still hanging from the ceilings.between  july and  september , an expedition mounted by ifremer and a consortium of american investors which included george tulloch, g. michael harris, d. michael harris and ralph white made  dives to the titanic using the submersible nautile. controversially, they salvaged and brought ashore more than , objects. a joint russiancanadianamerican expedition took place in  using the research vessel akademik mstislav keldysh and its two mir submersibles. sponsored by stephen low and imax, cbs, national geographic and others, the expedition carried out extensive scientific research with a crew of  scientists and engineers. the mirs carried out  dives, spending over  hours at the bottom, shooting , feet  of imax film. this was used to create the  documentary film titanica, which was later released in the us on dvd in a reedited version narrated by leonard nimoy.ifremer and rms titanic inc., the successors to the sponsors of the  expedition, returned to the wreck with nautile and the rov robin in june . over the course of fifteen days, nautile made fifteen dives lasting between eight and twelve hours each. another  artefacts were recovered during the expedition including a twotonne piece of a reciprocating engine, a lifeboat davit and the steam whistle from the ships forward funnel.in , ,  and  rms titanic inc. carried out an intensive series of dives that led to the recovery of over , items in the first two expeditions alone. the  expedition controversially attempted to raise a section of the titanic itself, a section of the outer hull that originally comprised part of the wall of two firstclass cabins on c deck, extending down to d deck. it weighed  tons, measured  by  feet  and had four portholes in it, three of which still had glass in them. the section had come loose either during the sinking or as a result of the impact with the sea bed.its recovery using dieselfilled flotation bags was turned into something of an entertainment event, with two cruise ships accompanying the expedition to the wreck site. passengers were offered the chance, at , per person, to watch the recovery on television screens in their cabins while enjoying luxury accommodation, las vegasstyle shows, and casino gambling aboard the ships. various celebrities were recruited to enliven the proceedings, including burt reynolds, debbie reynolds and buzz aldrin, and grand receptions for vips were scheduled onshore where the hull section would be displayed.however the lift ended disastrously when rough weather caused the ropes supporting the bags to snap. at the moment the ropes broke, the hull section had been lifted to within only  feet  of the surface. it hurtled , feet  back down, embedding itself upright on the sea floor. the attempt was strongly criticised by marine archaeologists, scientists, and historians as a moneymaking publicity stunt; several publications compared the event to grave robbing, and ballard called the event a carnival and stated that we tried to put it to rest, but this perpetuates the tragedy. a second, successful attempt to lift the fragment was carried out in . the socalled big piece was conserved in a laboratory in santa fe for two years before being put on display at the luxor las vegas hotel and casino.in , canadian director james cameron chartered the akademik mstislav keldysh and the mirs to make  dives to the titanic. he used the footage in his blockbuster  film titanic. the discovery of the wreck and a national geographic documentary of ballards  expedition had inspired him to write a synopsis in  of what eventually became the film do story with bookends of present day scene of wreck using submersibles intercut with memories of a survivor and recreated scenes of the night of the sinking. a crucible of human values under stress.

the  expedition by rms titanic inc. carried out  dives during which over  artefacts were recovered, including the ships engine telegraphs, perfume vials and watertight door gears.in , an american coupledavid leibowitz and kimberly millercaused controversy when they were married aboard a submersible that had set down on the bow of the titanic, in a deliberate echo of a famous scene from james camerons  film. the wedding was essentially a publicity stunt, sponsored by a british company called subsea explorer which had offered a free dive to the titanic that leibowitz had won. he asked whether his fiance could come too and was told that she couldbut only if she agreed to get married during the trip.the same company also brought along philip littlejohn, the grandson of one of the titanics surviving crew members, who became the first descendant of a titanic passenger or crew member to visit the wreck. cameron himself also returned to the titanic in  to carry out filming for walt disney pictures ghosts of the abyss, filmed in d.in  and , the us national oceanic and atmospheric administration carried out two expeditions to the titanic. the first, carried out between  june and  july , performed four dives in two days. its key aims were to assess the current condition of the wreck site and carry out scientific observations to support ongoing research. the stern section, which had previously received relatively little attention from explorers, was specifically targeted for analysis. the microbial colonies aboard the titanic were also a key focus of investigation. the second expedition, from  may   june , saw the return of robert ballard to the titanic nearly  years after he discovered it. the expedition spent  days on the wreck, carrying out highresolution mapping using video and stereoscopic still images.in  there were two expeditions to the titanic. james cameron returned for the third and last time to film last mysteries of the titanic. another expedition searched for previously unseen pieces of wreckage, and led to the documentary titanics final moments missing pieces.

rms titanic inc. mounted further expeditions to the titanic in  and , when the first comprehensive map of the entire debris field was produced. two autonomous underwater vehiclestorpedoshaped robotsrepeatedly ran backward and forward across the bynauticalmile  debris field, taking sonar scans and over , highresolution images. this enabled a detailed photomosaic of the debris field to be created for the first time, giving scientists a much clearer view of the dynamics of the ships sinking. the expedition encountered difficulties several hurricanes passed over the wreck site, and the remora rov was caught in a piece of wreckage. this same year saw the discovery of the new bacteria living in the rusticles on the titanic, halomonas titanicae.tourist and scientific visits to the titanic still continue; by april ,  years since the disaster and nearly  since the discovery of the wreck, around  people had visited. on  april  , the wreck of the titanic became eligible for protection under the  unesco convention on the protection of the underwater cultural heritage. in the same month, robert ballard, the wrecks discoverer, announced a plan to preserve the wreck of the titanic by using deepsea robots to paint the wreck with antifouling paint, to help keep the wreck in its current state for all time. the proposed plan that ballard announced has been outlined in a documentary made to time with the titanics th sinking anniversary called save the titanic with bob ballard where ballard himself talks about how this proposed paint job on the wreck will work. ballard says that he proposed to robotically clean and repaint the titanic with a colour scheme mimicking rusticles because he saw original antifouling paint on the ships hull, which was still working even after  years on the seabed when he visited the titanic in .in august , a team of explorers and scientists used deepsubmergence vehicle limiting factor to visit the wreck, marking the first crewed dive to the ship in  years. five dives took place over a period of eight days. the team used specially adapted cameras to capture the wreck in k resolution for the first time, and dedicated photogrammetry passes were performed to create highly accurate and photoreal d models of the wreck. footage from the dive was used for a documentary film by atlantic productions. the documentary, back to the titanic, aired on national geographic in .in may , the mapping company magellan and the film production company atlantic productions created the first fullsized digital scan of the titanic, using deepsea mapping. the d view of the entire ship enables it to be seen as if the water has been drained away. it is hoped the scan can shed new light on the sinking.american company oceangate began conducting commercial submersible tours of the wreck in july  using its submersible titan. on  june , titan imploded near the wreck during a dive, killing its pilot and four passengers.

the location of the wreck is a considerable distance from the location transmitted by the ships wireless operators before she went down. the titanic is in two main pieces  nautical miles  southeast of mistaken point, newfoundland and labrador. the boilers found by argo, which mark the point at which the ship went down, are about  feet  east of the stern. the two main parts of the wreck of the titanic present a striking contrast. although fourteen survivors testified that the ship had broken apart as she sank, this testimony was discounted by the official inquiries, and it was supposed that the ship had sunk intact. it is now clear that the stresses on the titanic caused the ship to split apart between the second and third funnels at or just below the surface.

the bow section, which measures about  feet  long, is thought to have descended at an angle of about . its distance from the stern was caused by its planing forward horizontally by about  ft for every  ft  of its descent. during the descent to the sea bed, the funnels were swept away, taking with them the rigging and large lengths of cables. these dragged along the boat deck, tearing away many of the davits and much of the other deck equipment. the foremast was also torn down, falling onto the port bridge area. the ships wheelhouse was swept away, possibly after being hit by the falling foremast.the bow hit the bottom at a speed of about  knots , digging about  feet  deep into the mud, up to the base of the anchors. the impact bent the hull in two places and caused it to buckle downwards by about  under the forward well deck cranes and by about  under the forward expansion joint. when the bow section hit the sea bed, the weakened decks at the rear, where the ship had broken apart, collapsed on top of each other. the forward hatch cover was also blown off and landed a couple of hundred feet in front of the bow, possibly due to the force of water being pushed out as the bow impacted the bottom.the area around the bridge is particularly badly damaged; as robert ballard has put it, it looks as if it had been squashed by a giants fist. the roof of the officers quarters and the sides of the gymnasium appear pushed in, railings were bent outwards and vertical steel columns supporting the decks were bent into a cshape. charles r. pellegrino has proposed that this was the result of a downblast of water, caused by a slipstream that had followed the bow section as it fell towards the sea bed. according to pellegrinos hypothesis, when the bow came to an abrupt halt the inertia of the slipstream caused a rapidly moving column of water weighing thousands of tons to strike the top of the wreck, striking it near the bridge. this, argues pellegrino, caused large parts of the bows interior to be demolished by surges of water and violent eddies kicked up by the wrecks sudden halt. the damage caused by the collision with the iceberg is not visible at the bow as it is buried under mud.

despite the exterior devastation caused by the bows descent and collision with the ocean floor, there are parts of the interior in reasonably good condition. the bows slow flooding and its relatively smooth descent to the sea floor mitigated interior damage. the stairwell of the firstclass grand staircase between the boat deck and e deck is an empty chasm within the wreck, providing a convenient point of access for rovs. dense rusticles hanging from the steel decking combined with the deep layers of silt that have accumulated in the interior make navigating the wreck disorienting.

passenger staterooms have largely deteriorated because they were framed in perishable softwoods such as pine, leaving hanging electrical wire, light fixtures and debris interspersed with more durable items like brass bed frames, light fixtures, and marbletopped washstands. woodwork with attachments like doorknobs, drawerpulls or pushplates have survived in better condition because of the small electric charge emitted by metal which repels fish and other organisms. hardwoods like teak and mahogany, the material for most stateroom furnishings, are more resistant to decay. lavatories and bathrooms within the passenger quarters have resisted decay because they were framed in steel.

the only intact public rooms remaining in either the stern or bow sections are the firstclass reception room and dining saloon, both on ddeck. most of the dining saloon has collapsed because of its proximity to the breakup point midship, but the very forward part is accessible and the rectangular leaded glass windows, table bases, and ceiling lamps are noticeably preserved. the reception room with its leaded glass windows and mahogany panelling remains remarkably intact, although the ceiling is sagging and there is a deep layer of silt obstructing the floor. the turkish baths on fdeck were found to be in excellent condition during their rediscovery in , preserving the bluegreen tiles, carved teak woodwork, and inlaid furniture. the grand staircase was likely destroyed during the sinking, but the surrounding firstclass foyers and elevator entrances preserve many of the ormolu and crystal lamps, oak timbers, and oakframed stanchions.in addition to the passenger areas, crew areas like the firemens mess, dormitories, parts of scotland road on edeck and the cargo holds on the orlop deck have also been explored. the ghosts of the abyss expedition in  attempted to locate the famed renault automobile belonging to william carter, but the cargo was indistinguishable beneath the silt and rusticles.

the stern of the ship, which measures about  feet  long, was catastrophically damaged during the descent and landing on the sea bed. it had not fully filled with water when it sank, and the increasing water pressure caused trapped air pockets to implode, tearing apart the hull. it was loud enough that multiple survivors reported hearing explosions about ten seconds after the stern had sunk beneath the waves. data from a sonar map made during a  expedition showed that the stern rotated like a helicopter blade as it sank.the rudder appears to have swung over to an angle of about  to  during the sterns descent, causing the section to follow a tight spiral to the bottom. it probably struck rudderfirst, burying most of the rudder in the mud up to a depth of  feet . the decks pancaked one atop another and the hull plating splayed out to the sides of the shattered section. the pancaking is so severe that the combined height of the decks, which are piled up on top of the reciprocating engines, is now generally not more than about  to  feet  high. no individual deck is more than about  foot  high.large sections of the hull plating appear to have fallen off well before the wreck hit the bottom. one such section, thought to have been from the galleys, separated from the stern in one piece and landed nearby. the force of the water tore up the poop deck and folded it back on itself. the centre propeller is totally buried, while the force of the impact caused the two wing propellers and shafts to be bent upwards by an angle of about .a large vshaped section of the ship just aft of midships, running from the keel upwards through number  boiler room and upwards to cover the area under funnel numbers three and four, was believed to have disintegrated entirely when the ship broke up. this was one of the weakest parts of the ship as a result of the presence of two large open spaces  the forward end of the engine room and the aft first class passenger staircase. the rest of this part of the ship is scattered across the seabed at distances of  to  feet  from the main part of the stern.during the  expedition to map the wreck site, a major chunk of the deck house  along with pieces of the third funnel were found. this showed that instead of simply disintegrating into a mass of debris, large sections of the ship broke off in chunks and that the ship broke in half between funnel numbers two and three, and not funnel numbers three and four. five of the boilers from number  boiler room came loose during its disintegration and landed in the debris field around the stern. experts believe that this tight cluster of boilers marks the hypocentre of where the ship broke up , feet above. the rest of the boilers are still presumably located in the bow section.

as the titanic broke apart, many objects and pieces of hull were scattered across the sea bed. there are two debris fields in the vicinity of the wreck, each between ,, ft  long, trailing in a southwesterly direction from the bow and stern. they cover an area of about  sq mi . most of the debris is concentrated near the stern section of the titanic. it consists of thousands of objects from the interior of the ship, ranging from tons of coal spilled from ruptured bunkers to suitcases, clothes, corked wine bottles , bathtubs, windows, washbasins, jugs, bowls, hand mirrors and numerous other personal effects. the debris field also includes numerous pieces of the ship itself, with the largest pieces of debris in the vicinity of the partially disintegrated stern section. it is also believed that the remains of the ships four funnels are in one of these debris fields.

prior to the discovery of the titanics wreck, in addition to the common assumption that she had sunk in one piece, it had been widely believed that conditions at , feet  down would preserve the ship virtually intact. the water is bitterly cold at only about  c , there is no light, and the high pressure was thought to be likely to lower oxygen and salinity levels to the point that organisms would not be able to gain a foothold on the wreck. the titanic would effectively be in a deep freeze.the reality has turned out to be very different, and the ship has increasingly deteriorated since she sank in april . her gradual decay is due to a number of different processes  physical, chemical and biological. she is situated on an undulating, gently sloping area of seabed in titanic canyon, which is swept by the western boundary current. eddies from the current flow constantly across the wreck, scouring the sea bed and keeping sediment from building up over the hull. the current is strong and often changeable, gradually opening up holes in the ships hull. salt corrosion eats away at the hull, and it is also affected by galvanic corrosion.the most dramatic deterioration has been caused by biological factors. it used to be thought that the depths of the ocean were a lifeless desert, but research carried out since the mids has found that the ocean floor is teeming with life and may rival the tropical rainforests for biodiversity. during the  imax expedition, scientists were surprised by the variety of organisms that they found in and around the titanic. a total of  species were observed, including sea anemones, crabs, shrimp, starfish, and rattail fish up to a yard  long. much larger creatures have been glimpsed by explorers.some of the titanics fauna has never been seen anywhere else; james camerons  expedition discovered a previously unknown type of sea cucumber, lavender with a glowing row of phosphorescent portholes along its side. a newly discovered species of rusteating bacterium found on the ship has been named halomonas titanicae, which has been found to cause rapid decay of the wreck. henrietta mann, who discovered the bacteria, has estimated that the titanic will completely collapse possibly as soon as . the canadian geophysicist steve blasco has commented that the wreck has become an oasis, a thriving ecosystem sitting in a vast desert. in mid, the facilities of the institut lauelangevin used neutron imaging to demonstrate that a molecule called ectoine is used by halomonas titanicae to regulate fluid balance and cell volume to survive at such pressures and salinities.analysis by henrietta mann and bhavleen kaur, both of dalhousie university in halifax, nova scotia, in conjunction with other scientists and researchers of the university of seville in spain, has determined that the wreck of the titanic will not exist by  and that preservation of the titanic is impossible. unfortunately, because titanic is . miles  down, it is very difficult or impossible to preserve. it is film which will preserve it for history now, says mann. it has already lasted for  years, but eventually there will be nothing left but a rust stain on the bottom of the atlantic... i think titanic has maybe  or  years left. i dont think it will have too much longer than that. other scientists estimated that the titanic would last no longer than  years, as of .the soft organic material aboard and dispersed onto the seabed around the hull would have been the first to disappear, rapidly devoured by fish and crustaceans. woodboring molluscs such as teredo colonised the ships decks and interior in huge numbers, eating away the wooden decking and other wooden objects such as furniture, panelling, doors and staircase banisters. when their food ran out they died, leaving behind calcareous tubes.the question of the victims bodies is one that has often troubled explorers of the wreck site. when the debris field was surveyed in robert ballards  expedition, pairs of shoes were observed lying next to each other on the sea bed. the flesh, bones, and clothes had long since been consumed but the tannin in the shoes leather had apparently resisted the bacteria, leaving the shoes as the only markers of where a body had once lain. ballard has suggested that skeletons may remain deep within the titanics hull, such as in the engine rooms or thirdclass cabins. this has been disputed by scientists, who have estimated that the bodies would have completely disappeared by the early s at the latest.the molluscs and scavengers did not consume everything organic. some of the wooden objects on the ship and in the debris field have not been consumed, particularly those made of teak, a dense wood that seems to have resisted the borers. the firstclass reception area off the ships grand staircase is still intact and furniture is still visible among the debris on the floor. although most of the corridors have lost their walls, furniture is still in place in many cabins; in one, a mattress is still on the bed, with an intact and undamaged dresser behind it. robert ballard has suggested that areas within the ship or buried under debris, where scavengers may not have been able to reach, may still contain human remains. according to charles pellegrino, who dived on the titanic in , a finger bone encircled by the partial remains of a wedding ring was found concreted to the bottom of a soup tureen that was retrieved from the debris field. it was returned to the sea bed on the next dive.

the longestlasting inhabitants of the titanic are likely to be bacteria and archaea that have colonised the metal hull of the ship. they have produced reddishbrown stalactites of rust hanging down as much as several feet, looking like long needlelike icicles, as ballard has put it. the formations, which ballard dubbed rusticles, are extremely fragile and disintegrate in a cloud of particles if touched. the bacteria consume the iron in the hull, oxidising it and leaving rust particles behind as a waste product. to protect themselves from the seawater, they secrete an acidic viscous slime that flows where gravity takes it, carrying ferric oxides and hydroxides. these form the rusticles.when scientists were able to retrieve a rusticle, it was discovered that it was far more complex than had been imagined, with complex systems of roots infiltrating the metal, interior channels, bundles of fibres, pores and other structures. charles pellegrino comments that they seem more akin to levels of tissue organization found in sponges or mosses and other members of the animal or plant kingdoms. the bacteria are estimated to be consuming the titanics hull at the rate of  pounds  per day, which is about  pounds  per hour or  ounces  per minute. roy collimore, a microbiologist, estimates that the bow alone now supports some  tons of rusticles, and that they will have devoured  of the hull within  years.since the titanics wreck was discovered in , radical changes have been observed in the marine ecosystem around the ship. the  expedition recorded  more brittle stars and sea cucumbers than ballards  expedition, while crinoids and sea squirts had taken root all over the sea bed. red krill had appeared, and an unknown organism had built numerous nests across the seabed from black pebbles. the number of rusticles on the ship had increased greatly. curiously, the same thing had happened over about the same timescale to the wreck of the german battleship bismarck, sunk at a depth of , metres  on the other side of the atlantic. the mud around the ship was found to contain hundreds of different species of animals. the sudden explosion of life around the titanic may be a result of an increased amount of nutrients falling from the surface, possibly a result of human overfishing, eliminating fish that would otherwise have consumed the nutrients.many scientists, including ballard, are concerned that visits by tourists in submersibles and the recovery of artefacts are causing the wreck to decay faster. underwater bacteria have been eating away at the titanics steel and transformed it into rust since the ship sank, but because of the extra damage caused by visitors, the national oceanic and atmospheric administration estimates that the hull and structure of the ship may collapse to the ocean floor within the next  years. the promenade deck has deteriorated significantly in recent years, partly because of damage caused by submersibles landing on the ship. the mast has almost completely deteriorated and has been stripped of its bell and brass light.

other damage includes a gash on the bow section where block letters once spelled titanic, part of the brass telemotor which once held the ships wooden wheel is now twisted, and the crows nest has completely deteriorated. cameron is responsible for some of the more significant damage during his expedition to the ship in  to acquire footage for his film titanic two years later. one of the mir submersibles used on the expedition collided with the hull, damaging both and leaving fragments of the submersibles propeller shroud scattered around the superstructure. captain smiths quarters were heavily damaged by the collapse of the external bulkhead, which exposed the cabins interior.in  an international survey team reported that the wreck had further deteriorated and that the captains bathtub was now lost. a  expedition reported that the tub was not lost but that the once clear view into it was obstructed by debris.

the titanics discovery in  sparked a debate over the ownership of the wreck and the valuable items inside and on the sea bed around it. ballard and his crew did not bring up any artefacts from the wreck, considering such an act to be tantamount to grave robbing. ballard has since argued strongly that it be left unmolested by treasure seekers. as ballard has put it, the development of deepsea submersibles has made the great pyramids of the deep .... accessible to man. he can either plunder them like the grave robbers of egypt or protect them for the countless generations which will follow ours. however, within only two weeks of the discovery, british insurance company the liverpool and london steamship protection and indemnity association claimed that it owned the wreck, and several more schemes to raise it were announced. a belgian entrepreneur offered trips to the titanic for , a head. a british man named douglas faulknerwoolley claims ownership of the titanic, based on a late s ruling by the british board of trade which awarded him ownership of the wreck. the wreck had not been discovered at that time.spurred by ballards appeals for the wreck to be left alone, north carolina congressman walter b. jones sr. introduced the rms titanic maritime memorial act in the united states house of representatives in . it called for strict scientific guidelines to be introduced to govern the exploration and salvage of the titanic and urged the united states secretary of state to lobby canada, the united kingdom and france to pass similar legislation. it passed the house and senate by an overwhelming majority and was signed into law by president ronald reagan on  october . however, the law has been ineffective as the wreck lies outside united states waters, and the act was set aside by the united states district court for the eastern district of virginia, norfolk division, in . although negotiations among the four countries were carried out between  and , the resulting agreement concerning the shipwrecked vessel rms titanic has been ratified by only the us and the uk.

only a few days after ballards discovery of the wreck, jack grimmthe author of the unsuccessful early s attempts to find the titanicclaimed ownership of it on the grounds that he had allegedly been the first to find it. he announced that he intended to begin salvaging the wreck. he said that he couldnt see them just lie there and be absorbed by the ocean floor. what possible harm can salvaging do to this mass of twisted steeltitanic ventures inc., a connecticutbased consortium, cosponsored a survey and salvage operation in  with the french oceanographic agency ifremer. the expedition produced an outcry. titanic survivor eva hart condemned what many saw as the looting of a mass grave to bring up those things from a mass sea grave just to make a few thousand pounds shows a dreadful insensitivity and greed. the grave should be left alone. theyre simply going to do it as fortune hunters, vultures, piratespublic misgivings increased when, on  october , a television program, return to the titanic live, was broadcast from the cit des sciences et de lindustrie in paris, hosted by telly savalas. in front of a live tv audience, a valise recovered from the sea bed was opened, revealing a number of personal items apparently belonging to richard l. beckwith of new york, who survived the sinking. a safe was also opened, revealing a few items of memorabilia and wet banknotes. the tone of the event was described by one commentator as unsympathetic, lacking dignity and finesse, and with all the superficial qualities of a media event.new york times television critic john corry called the event a combination of the sacred and profane and sometimes the downright silly. paul heyer comments that it was presented as a kind of deep sea striptease and that savalas seemed haggard, missed several cues and at one point almost tripped over a chair. controversy persisted after the broadcast when claims were made that the safe had been opened beforehand and that the show had been a fraud.marextitanic inc. was formed in  to launch an expedition to the titanic. marextitanics ceo was james kollar. the company was a subsidiary of marex international, an international marine salvage firm located in memphis, tennessee. in  marex made a bid to seize control of the artefacts and the wreck itself by suing titanic ventures, arguing that the latter had abandoned its claim by not returning to the wreck since the  expedition. it claimed a superior right of salvage based on a pill bottle and hull fragment that were said to have been retrieved by marex. marex simultaneously sent a vessel, the sea mussel, to carry out its own salvage operation.however, the marex artefacts were alleged to have been illegally retrieved by the  russianamericancanadian expedition and marex was issued with a temporary injunction preventing it from carrying out its plans. in october  the injunction was made permanent and the salvage claims of titanic ventures were upheld. the decision was later reversed by an appeals court but marexs claims were not renewed. even so, titanic ventures control of the artefacts recovered in  remained in question until  when a french administrator in the office of maritime affairs of the ministry of equipment, transportation, and tourism awarded the company title to the artefacts.in may , titanic ventures sold its interests in the salvage operations and artefacts to rms titanic inc., a subsidiary of premier exhibitions inc. headed by george tulloch and arnie geller. it had to go through a laborious legal process of having itself legally recognised as the sole and exclusive salvager of the wreck. its claim was opposed for a while by the liverpool and london steamship protection and indemnity association, the titanics former insurer, but was eventually settled. it was awarded ownership and salvaging rights by the united states district court for the eastern district of virginia on  june  in a ruling that declared the company to be the salvor in possession of the wreck.litigation has continued over the artefacts in recent years. in a motion filed on  february , rms titanic inc. requested that the united states district court enter an order awarding it title to all the artefacts  which are the subject of this action pursuant to the law of finds or, in the alternative, a salvage award in the amount of  million. rms titanic inc. excluded from its motion any claim for an award of title to the objects recovered in , but it did request that the district court declare that, based on the french administrative action, the artifacts raised during the  expedition are independently owned by rmst. following a hearing, the district court entered an order dated  july , in which it refused to grant comity or recognise the  decision of the french administrator, and rejected rms titanic inc.s claim that it should be awarded title to the items recovered since  under the maritime law of finds.rms titanic inc. appealed to the united states court of appeals for the fourth circuit. in its decision of  january  the court recognised explicitly the appropriateness of applying maritime salvage law to historic wrecks such as that of titanic and denied the application of the maritime law of finds. the court also ruled that the district court lacked jurisdiction over the  artifacts, and therefore vacated that part of the courts  july  order. in other words, according to this decision, rms titanic inc. has ownership title to the objects awarded in the french decision  and continues to be salvorinpossession of the titanic wreck. the court of appeals remanded the case to the district court to determine the salvage award .on  march , it was revealed that the fate of , artefacts retrieved from the wreck would rest with a u.s. district judges decision. the ruling was later issued in two decisions on  august  and  august . as announced in , the judge ruled that rms titanic inc. owned the artefacts and her decision dealt with the status of the wreck as well as establishing a monitoring system to check future activity upon the wreck site. on  august , judge rebecca beach smith granted rms titanic, inc. fair market value for the artefacts but deferred ruling on their ownership and the conditions for their preservation, possible disposition and exhibition until a further decision could be reached.on  august , judge smith granted title to thousands of artefacts from the titanic, that rms titanic inc. did not already own under a french court decision concerning the first group of salvaged artefacts, to rms titanic inc. subject to a detailed list of conditions concerning preservation and disposition of the items. the artefacts can be sold only to a company that would abide by the lengthy list of conditions and restrictions. rms titanic inc. can profit from the artefacts through exhibiting them.rms titanic inc. has also attempted to secure exclusive physical access to the wreck site. in , it obtained a court order finding that it had the exclusive right to take any and all types of photographic images of the titanic wreck and wreck site. it obtained another order in  against deep ocean expeditions and chris haver, a british virgin islands corporation that aimed to run tourist trips to the titanic at a cost of , per person . this was overturned in march  by the united states court of appeals for the fourth circuit, which ruled that the law of salvage did not extend to obtaining exclusive rights to view, visit and photograph a wreck.

the court pointed out that the titanic is located in a public place in international waters, rather than in a private or controllable location to which access could be restricted by the owner. granting such a right would also create a perverse incentive; since the aim of salvage is to carry out a salvage operation, leaving property in place so that it could be photographed would run counter to this objective.

rms titanic inc. has attracted considerable controversy for its approach to the titanic. two rival camps have formed following the wrecks discovery the conservationists, championed by rms titanic inc.s george tulloch , and the protectionists, whose most prominent advocate is robert ballard. the first camp has argued that artefacts from around the wreck should be recovered and conserved, while the latter camp argues that the entire wreck site should have been left undisturbed as a mass grave. both camps agree that the wreck itself should not be salvaged  though rms titanic inc. did not stick to its proclaimed handsoff policy when it managed to demolish the titanics crows nest in the course of retrieving the bell. its predecessor titanic ventures agreed with ifremer that it would not sell any of the artefacts but would put them on public display, for which it could charge an entry fee.tullochs approach has undoubtedly resulted in outcomes that would not have been possible otherwise. in , he presented edith brown haisman, a yearold survivor of the disaster, with her fathers pocket watch, which had been retrieved from the sea bed. she had last seen it on  april , when he waved goodbye to his wife and daughter as they left aboard lifeboat . they never saw him again, and he presumably went down with the ship. the watch was loaned to haisman for life; when she died five years later, it was reclaimed by rms titanic inc.on another occasion, a steamer trunk spotted in the debris field was found to contain three musical instruments, a deck of playing cards, a diary belonging to one howard irwin, and a bundle of letters from his girlfriend pearl shuttle. it was first thought that irwin, a musician and professional gambler, had boarded the ship under a false identity. there was no record of him being among the passengers, even though a ticket had been purchased for him. it turned out that he had stayed ashore but his trunk had been brought aboard the ship by his friend henry sutehall, who was among the victims of the disaster. the fragile contents of the trunk were preserved by the interiors starvation of oxygen, which prevented bacteria from consuming the paper. very few other shipwrecks have yielded readable paper.on the other hand, the heavily commercialised approach of rms titanic inc. has caused repeated controversy and many have argued that salvaging the titanic is an inherently disrespectful act. the wreck site has been called a tomb and a reliquary, a gravestone for the , people who died and hallowed ground. titanic historians john eaton and charles haas argue that the salvagers are little more than plunderers and armchair salvage experts and others have characterised them as grave robbers. the return to titanic... live television show in  was widely condemned as a circus, though the  expeditions scientific and financial leaders had no control over the show.in a particularly controversial episode, rms titanic inc. sold some , lumps of coal retrieved from the debris field in order to fund the rumoured  million cost of lifting the big piece of the ships hull. it attempted to get around the nosale agreement with ifremer by charging the new owners a  fee to act as conservators, in order to claim that the coal lumps had not actually been sold. this attracted strong criticism from all sides. nonetheless, in  tulloch was ousted by the companys shareholders and was replaced by arnie geller, who promised a more aggressive approach to making a profit. the company declared that it had an absolute right to sell recovered gold, coins and currency. it was prevented from doing this by a court order in the united states and ifremer withdrew its cooperation and its submersibles, threatening a lawsuit.

in january , the united kingdom and united states governments announced that they had agreed to protect the wreckage of the titanic. the agreement, signed by the british government in , came into effect after being ratified by u.s. secretary of state mike pompeo at the end of . uk maritime minister nus ghani said the uk would work with canada and france to bring even more protection to the wreckage.

objects from the titanic have been exhibited for many years, though only a few were retrieved before the discovery of the wreck in . the maritime museum of the atlantic in halifax, nova scotia, has a collection of wooden fragments and an intact deckchair plucked from the sea by the canadian search vessels that recovered the victims bodies. various other museums, including the national maritime museum in greenwich and the seacity museum in southampton, have objects donated by survivors and relatives of victims, including some items that were retrieved from the bodies of victims.

more donated titanic artefacts are to be found in the merseyside maritime museum in liverpool and the titanic historical societys museum in indian orchard, springfield, massachusetts. the latters collection includes items such as the life jacket of madeleine astor, the wife of millionaire titanic victim john jacob astor iv, a rivet which was removed from the hull before the titanic went to sea, an ice warning which never reached the bridge, a restaurant menu and a sample square of carpet from a first class stateroom.

rms titanic inc. organises largescale exhibitions around the world of artefacts retrieved from the wreck site. after minor exhibitions were held in paris and scandinavia, the first major exhibition of recovered artefacts was held at the national maritime museum in . it was hugely popular, drawing an average of , visitors a week during the yearlong exhibition. since then, rms titanic inc. has established a largescale permanent exhibition of titanic artefacts at the luxor hotel and casino in las vegas, nevada.

the ,squarefoot  exhibit is the home of the big piece of the hull retrieved in  and features conserved items including luggage, the titanics whistles, floor tiles and an unopened bottle of champagne. the exhibit includes a fullscale replica of the ships grand staircase and part of the promenade deck, and even a mockup of the iceberg. it also runs a travelling exhibition called titanic the artifact exhibition which has opened in various cities around the world and has been seen by over  million people. the exhibition typically runs for six to nine months featuring a combination of artefacts, reconstructions and displays of the ship, her passengers and crew and the disaster itself. in a similar fashion to the united states holocaust memorial museum in washington, d.c., visitors are given a boarding pass in the name of an individual passenger at the start of the exhibition. they do not discover the fate of their assigned passenger until the end.

the vast majority of the relics retrieved by various groups from the titanic were owned by premier exhibitions which operated rms titanic inc. and filed for bankruptcy in . in late august , the groups vying to purchase the , relics included one by museums in england and northern ireland, with assistance from james cameron and some financial support from national geographic. oceanographer robert ballard said he favoured this bid since it would ensure that the memorabilia would be permanently displayed in belfast and in greenwich. a decision as to the outcome was to be made by a united states district court judge in the case titled rms titanic inc., , u.s. bankruptcy court, middle district of florida . on  october , a judge approved the sale of artefacts to a private investor group.

elizabeth i  was queen of england and ireland from  november  until her death in . elizabeth was the last monarch of the house of tudor and is sometimes referred to as the virgin queen.elizabeth was the only surviving daughter of henry viii by anne boleyn, his second wife, who was executed when elizabeth was two years old. annes marriage to henry was annulled, and elizabeth declared illegitimate. henry restored her to the line of succession when she was ten, via the third succession act . after henrys death in , elizabeths younger halfbrother edward vi ruled until his own death in , bequeathing the crown to a protestant cousin, lady jane grey and ignoring the claims of his two halfsisters, the catholic mary and the younger elizabeth, in spite of statutes to the contrary. edwards will was set aside within weeks of his death and mary became queen, deposing and executing jane. during marys reign, elizabeth was imprisoned for nearly a year on suspicion of supporting protestant rebels.

upon her halfsisters death in , elizabeth succeeded to the throne and set out to rule by good counsel. she depended heavily on a group of trusted advisers led by william cecil, whom she created baron burghley. one of her first actions as queen was the establishment of an english protestant church, of which she became the supreme governor. this elizabethan religious settlement was to evolve into the church of england. it was expected that elizabeth would marry and produce an heir; however, despite numerous courtships, she never did. she was eventually succeeded by her first cousin twice removed, james vi of scotland, the son of mary, queen of scots.

in government, elizabeth was more moderate than her father and siblings had been. one of her mottoes was video et taceo . in religion, she was relatively tolerant and avoided systematic persecution. after the pope declared her illegitimate in , which in theory released english catholics from allegiance to her, several conspiracies threatened her life, all of which were defeated with the help of her ministers secret service, run by francis walsingham. elizabeth was cautious in foreign affairs, manoeuvring between the major powers of france and spain. she halfheartedly supported a number of ineffective, poorly resourced military campaigns in the netherlands, france, and ireland. by the mids, england could no longer avoid war with spain.

as she grew older, elizabeth became celebrated for her virginity. a cult of personality grew around her which was celebrated in the portraits, pageants, and literature of the day. elizabeths reign became known as the elizabethan era. the period is famous for the flourishing of english drama, led by playwrights such as william shakespeare and christopher marlowe, the prowess of english maritime adventurers, such as francis drake and walter raleigh, and for the defeat of the spanish armada. some historians depict elizabeth as a shorttempered, sometimes indecisive ruler, who enjoyed more than her fair share of luck. towards the end of her reign, a series of economic and military problems weakened her popularity. elizabeth is acknowledged as a charismatic performer  and a dogged survivor  in an era when government was ramshackle and limited, and when monarchs in neighbouring countries faced internal problems that jeopardised their thrones. after the short, disastrous reigns of her siblings, her  years on the throne provided welcome stability for the kingdom and helped to forge a sense of national identity.

elizabeth was born at greenwich palace on  september  and was named after her grandmothers, elizabeth of york and lady elizabeth howard. she was the second child of henry viii of england born in wedlock to survive infancy. her mother was henrys second wife, anne boleyn. at birth, elizabeth was the heir presumptive to the english throne. her elder halfsister mary had lost her position as a legitimate heir when henry annulled his marriage to marys mother, catherine of aragon, to marry anne, with the intent to sire a male heir and ensure the tudor succession. she was baptised on  september , and her godparents were thomas cranmer, archbishop of canterbury; henry courtenay, st marquess of exeter; elizabeth stafford, duchess of norfolk; and margaret wotton, dowager marchioness of dorset. a canopy was carried at the ceremony over the infant by her uncle george boleyn, viscount rochford; john hussey, st baron hussey of sleaford; lord thomas howard; and william howard, st baron howard of effingham.elizabeth was two years and eight months old when her mother was beheaded on  may , four months after catherine of aragons death from natural causes. elizabeth was declared illegitimate and deprived of her place in the royal succession. eleven days after anne boleyns execution, henry married jane seymour. queen jane died the next year shortly after the birth of their son, edward, who was undisputed heir apparent to the throne. elizabeth was placed in her halfbrothers household and carried the chrisom, or baptismal cloth, at his christening.

elizabeths first governess, margaret bryan, wrote that she was as toward a child and as gentle of conditions as ever i knew any in my life. catherine champernowne, better known by her later, married name of catherine kat ashley, was appointed as elizabeths governess in , and she remained elizabeths friend until her death in . champernowne taught elizabeth four languages french, dutch, italian and spanish. by the time william grindal became her tutor in , elizabeth could write english, latin, and italian. under grindal, a talented and skilful tutor, she also progressed in french and greek. by the age of , she was able to translate her stepmother catherine parrs religious work prayers or meditations from english into italian, latin, and french, which she presented to her father as a new years gift. from her teenage years and throughout her life, she translated works in latin and greek by numerous classical authors, including the pro marcello of cicero, the de consolatione philosophiae of boethius, a treatise by plutarch, and the annals of tacitus. a translation of tacitus from lambeth palace library, one of only four surviving english translations from the early modern era, was confirmed as elizabeths own in , after a detailed analysis of the handwriting and paper was undertaken.after grindal died in , elizabeth received her education under her brother edwards tutor, roger ascham, a sympathetic teacher who believed that learning should be engaging. current knowledge of elizabeths schooling and precocity comes largely from aschams memoirs. by the time her formal education ended in , elizabeth was one of the best educated women of her generation. at the end of her life, she was believed to speak the welsh, cornish, scottish and irish languages in addition to those mentioned above. the venetian ambassador stated in  that she possessed these languages so thoroughly that each appeared to be her native tongue. historian mark stoyle suggests that she was probably taught cornish by william killigrew, groom of the privy chamber and later chamberlain of the exchequer.

henry viii died in  and elizabeths halfbrother, edward vi, became king at the age of nine. catherine parr, henrys widow, soon married thomas seymour, st baron seymour of sudeley, edward vis uncle and the brother of lord protector edward seymour, st duke of somerset. the couple took elizabeth into their household at chelsea. there elizabeth experienced an emotional crisis that some historians believe affected her for the rest of her life. thomas seymour engaged in romps and horseplay with the yearold elizabeth, including entering her bedroom in his nightgown, tickling her, and slapping her on the buttocks. elizabeth rose early and surrounded herself with maids to avoid his unwelcome morning visits. parr, rather than confront her husband over his inappropriate activities, joined in. twice she accompanied him in tickling elizabeth, and once held her while he cut her black gown into a thousand pieces. however, after parr discovered the pair in an embrace, she ended this state of affairs. in may , elizabeth was sent away.

thomas seymour nevertheless continued scheming to control the royal family and tried to have himself appointed the governor of the kings person. when parr died after childbirth on  september , he renewed his attentions towards elizabeth, intent on marrying her. her governess kat ashley, who was fond of seymour, sought to convince elizabeth to take him as her husband. she tried to convince elizabeth to write to seymour and comfort him in his sorrow, but elizabeth claimed that thomas was not so saddened by her stepmothers death as to need comfort.

in january , seymour was arrested and imprisoned in the tower on suspicion of conspiring to depose his brother somerset as protector, marry lady jane grey to king edward vi, and take elizabeth as his own wife. elizabeth, living at hatfield house, would admit nothing. her stubbornness exasperated her interrogator, robert tyrwhitt, who reported, i do see it in her face that she is guilty. seymour was beheaded on  march .

edward vi died on  july , aged . his will ignored the succession to the crown act , excluded both mary and elizabeth from the succession, and instead declared as his heir lady jane grey, granddaughter of henry viiis younger sister mary tudor, queen of france. jane was proclaimed queen by the privy council, but her support quickly crumbled, and she was deposed after nine days. on  august , mary rode triumphantly into london, with elizabeth at her side.

the show of solidarity between the sisters did not last long. mary, a devout catholic, was determined to crush the protestant faith in which elizabeth had been educated, and she ordered that everyone attend catholic mass; elizabeth had to outwardly conform. marys initial popularity ebbed away in  when she announced plans to marry philip of spain, the son of holy roman emperor charles v and an active catholic. discontent spread rapidly through the country, and many looked to elizabeth as a focus for their opposition to marys religious policies.

in january and february , wyatts rebellion broke out; it was soon suppressed. elizabeth was brought to court and interrogated regarding her role, and on  march, she was imprisoned in the tower of london. elizabeth fervently protested her innocence. though it is unlikely that she had plotted with the rebels, some of them were known to have approached her. marys closest confidant, emperor charless ambassador simon renard, argued that her throne would never be safe while elizabeth lived; and lord chancellor stephen gardiner, worked to have elizabeth put on trial. elizabeths supporters in the government, including william paget, st baron paget, convinced mary to spare her sister in the absence of hard evidence against her. instead, on  may, elizabeth was moved from the tower to woodstock, where she was to spend almost a year under house arrest in the charge of henry bedingfeld. crowds cheered her all along the way.on  april , elizabeth was recalled to court to attend the final stages of marys apparent pregnancy. if mary and her child died, elizabeth would become queen, but if mary gave birth to a healthy child, elizabeths chances of becoming queen would recede sharply. when it became clear that mary was not pregnant, no one believed any longer that she could have a child. elizabeths succession seemed assured.king philip, who ascended the spanish throne in , acknowledged the new political reality and cultivated his sisterinlaw. she was a better ally than the chief alternative, mary, queen of scots, who had grown up in france and was betrothed to the dauphin of france. when his wife fell ill in , king philip sent the count of feria to consult with elizabeth. this interview was conducted at hatfield house, where she had returned to live in october . by october , elizabeth was already making plans for her government. mary recognised elizabeth as her heir on  november , and elizabeth became queen when mary died on  november.

elizabeth became queen at the age of , and declared her intentions to her council and other peers who had come to hatfield to swear allegiance. the speech contains the first record of her adoption of the medieval political theology of the sovereigns two bodies the body natural and the body politic

my lords, the law of nature moves me to sorrow for my sister; the burden that is fallen upon me makes me amazed, and yet, considering i am gods creature, ordained to obey his appointment, i will thereto yield, desiring from the bottom of my heart that i may have assistance of his grace to be the minister of his heavenly will in this office now committed to me. and as i am but one body naturally considered, though by his permission a body politic to govern, so shall i desire you all ... to be assistant to me, that i with my ruling and you with your service may make a good account to almighty god and leave some comfort to our posterity on earth. i mean to direct all my actions by good advice and counsel.

as her triumphal progress wound through the city on the eve of the coronation ceremony, she was welcomed wholeheartedly by the citizens and greeted by orations and pageants, most with a strong protestant flavour. elizabeths open and gracious responses endeared her to the spectators, who were wonderfully ravished. the following day,  january , a date chosen by her astrologer john dee, elizabeth was crowned and anointed by owen oglethorpe, the catholic bishop of carlisle, in westminster abbey. she was then presented for the peoples acceptance, amidst a deafening noise of organs, fifes, trumpets, drums, and bells. although elizabeth was welcomed as queen in england, the country was still in a state of anxiety over the perceived catholic threat at home and overseas, as well as the choice of whom she would marry.

elizabeths personal religious convictions have been much debated by scholars. she was a protestant, but kept catholic symbols , and downplayed the role of sermons in defiance of a key protestant belief.elizabeth and her advisers perceived the threat of a catholic crusade against heretical england. the queen therefore sought a protestant solution that would not offend catholics too greatly while addressing the desires of english protestants, but she would not tolerate the puritans, who were pushing for farreaching reforms. as a result, the parliament of  started to legislate for a church based on the protestant settlement of edward vi, with the monarch as its head, but with many catholic elements, such as vestments.the house of commons backed the proposals strongly, but the bill of supremacy met opposition in the house of lords, particularly from the bishops. elizabeth was fortunate that many bishoprics were vacant at the time, including the archbishopric of canterbury. this enabled supporters amongst peers to outvote the bishops and conservative peers. nevertheless, elizabeth was forced to accept the title of supreme governor of the church of england rather than the more contentious title of supreme head, which many thought unacceptable for a woman to bear. the new act of supremacy became law on  may . all public officials were to swear an oath of loyalty to the monarch as the supreme governor or risk disqualification from office; the heresy laws were repealed, to avoid a repeat of the persecution of dissenters practised by mary. at the same time, a new act of uniformity was passed, which made attendance at church and the use of the  book of common prayer  compulsory, though the penalties for recusancy, or failure to attend and conform, were not extreme.

from the start of elizabeths reign it was expected that she would marry, and the question arose to whom. although she received many offers, she never married and remained childless; the reasons for this are not clear. historians have speculated that thomas seymour had put her off sexual relationships. she considered several suitors until she was about fifty. her last courtship was with francis, duke of anjou,  years her junior. while risking possible loss of power like her sister, who played into the hands of king philip ii of spain, marriage offered the chance of an heir. however, the choice of a husband might also provoke political instability or even insurrection.

in the spring of , it became evident that elizabeth was in love with her childhood friend robert dudley. it was said that his wife amy was suffering from a malady in one of her breasts and that the queen would like to marry robert if his wife should die. by the autumn of , several foreign suitors were vying for elizabeths hand; their impatient envoys engaged in ever more scandalous talk and reported that a marriage with her favourite was not welcome in england there is not a man who does not cry out on him and her with indignation ... she will marry none but the favoured robert. amy dudley died in september , from a fall from a flight of stairs and, despite the coroners inquest finding of accident, many people suspected her husband of having arranged her death so that he could marry the queen. elizabeth seriously considered marrying dudley for some time. however, william cecil, nicholas throckmorton, and some conservative peers made their disapproval unmistakably clear. there were even rumours that the nobility would rise if the marriage took place.among other marriage candidates being considered for the queen, robert dudley continued to be regarded as a possible candidate for nearly another decade. elizabeth was extremely jealous of his affections, even when she no longer meant to marry him herself. she raised dudley to the peerage as earl of leicester in . in , he finally married lettice knollys, to whom the queen reacted with repeated scenes of displeasure and lifelong hatred. still, dudley always remained at the centre of elizabeths emotional life, as historian susan doran has described the situation. he died shortly after the defeat of the spanish armada in . after elizabeths own death, a note from him was found among her most personal belongings, marked his last letter in her handwriting.

marriage negotiations constituted a key element in elizabeths foreign policy. she turned down the hand of philip, her halfsisters widower, early in  but for several years entertained the proposal of king eric xiv of sweden. earlier in elizabeths life a danish match for her had been discussed; henry viii had proposed one with the danish prince adolf, duke of holsteingottorp, in , and edward seymour, duke of somerset, suggested a marriage with prince frederick  several years later, but the negotiations had abated in . in the years around  a danoenglish protestant alliance was considered, and to counter swedens proposal, king frederick ii proposed to elizabeth in late .

for several years she also seriously negotiated to marry philips cousin charles ii, archduke of austria. by , relations with the habsburgs had deteriorated. elizabeth considered marriage to two french valois princes in turn, first henry, duke of anjou, and then from  to  his brother francis, duke of anjou, formerly duke of alenon. this last proposal was tied to a planned alliance against spanish control of the southern netherlands. elizabeth seems to have taken the courtship seriously for a time, and wore a frogshaped earring that francis had sent her.in , elizabeth told an imperial envoy if i follow the inclination of my nature, it is this beggarwoman and single, far rather than queen and married. later in the year, following elizabeths illness with smallpox, the succession question became a heated issue in parliament. members urged the queen to marry or nominate an heir, to prevent a civil war upon her death. she refused to do either. in april she prorogued the parliament, which did not reconvene until she needed its support to raise taxes in .

having previously promised to marry, she told an unruly house

i will never break the word of a prince spoken in public place, for my honours sake. and therefore i say again, i will marry as soon as i can conveniently, if god take not him away with whom i mind to marry, or myself, or else some other great let obstruction happen.

by , senior figures in the government privately accepted that elizabeth would never marry or name a successor. william cecil was already seeking solutions to the succession problem. for her failure to marry, elizabeth was often accused of irresponsibility. her silence, however, strengthened her own political security she knew that if she named an heir, her throne would be vulnerable to a coup; she remembered the way that a second person, as i have been had been used as the focus of plots against her predecessor.

elizabeths unmarried status inspired a cult of virginity related to that of the virgin mary. in poetry and portraiture, she was depicted as a virgin, a goddess, or both, not as a normal woman. at first, only elizabeth made a virtue of her ostensible virginity in , she told the commons, and, in the end, this shall be for me sufficient, that a marble stone shall declare that a queen, having reigned such a time, lived and died a virgin. later on, poets and writers took up the theme and developed an iconography that exalted elizabeth. public tributes to the virgin by  acted as a coded assertion of opposition to the queens marriage negotiations with the duke of alenon. ultimately, elizabeth would insist she was married to her kingdom and subjects, under divine protection. in , she spoke of all my husbands, my good people.

this claim of virginity was not universally accepted. catholics accused elizabeth of engaging in filthy lust that symbolically defiled the nation along with her body. henry iv of france said that one of the great questions of europe was whether queen elizabeth was a maid or no.a central issue, when it comes to the question of elizabeths virginity, was whether the queen ever consummated her love affair with robert dudley. in , she had dudleys bedchambers moved next to her own apartments. in , she was mysteriously bedridden with an illness that caused her body to swell.in , a young man calling himself arthur dudley was arrested on the coast of spain under suspicion of being a spy. the man claimed to be the illegitimate son of elizabeth and robert dudley, with his age being consistent with birth during the  illness. he was taken to madrid for investigation, where he was examined by francis englefield, a catholic aristocrat exiled to spain and secretary to king philip ii. three letters exist today describing the interview, detailing what arthur proclaimed to be the story of his life, from birth in the royal palace to the time of his arrival in spain. however, this failed to convince the spanish englefield admitted to king philip that arthurs claim at present amounts to nothing, but suggested that he should not be allowed to get away, but ... kept very secure. the king agreed, and arthur was never heard from again. modern scholarship dismisses the storys basic premise as impossible, and asserts that elizabeths life was so closely observed by contemporaries that she could not have hidden a pregnancy.

elizabeths first policy toward scotland was to oppose the french presence there. she feared that the french planned to invade england and put her catholic cousin mary, queen of scots, on the throne. mary was considered by many to be the heir to the english crown, being the granddaughter of henry viiis elder sister, margaret. mary boasted being the nearest kinswoman she hath. elizabeth was persuaded to send a force into scotland to aid the protestant rebels, and though the campaign was inept, the resulting treaty of edinburgh of july  removed the french threat in the north. when mary returned to scotland in  to take up the reins of power, the country had an established protestant church and was run by a council of protestant nobles supported by elizabeth. mary refused to ratify the treaty.in , elizabeth proposed her own suitor, robert dudley, as a husband for mary, without asking either of the two people concerned. both proved unenthusiastic, and in , mary married henry stuart, lord darnley, who carried his own claim to the english throne. the marriage was the first of a series of errors of judgement by mary that handed the victory to the scottish protestants and to elizabeth. darnley quickly became unpopular and was murdered in february  by conspirators almost certainly led by james hepburn, th earl of bothwell. shortly afterwards, on  may , mary married bothwell, arousing suspicions that she had been party to the murder of her husband. elizabeth confronted mary about the marriage, writing to her

how could a worse choice be made for your honour than in such haste to marry such a subject, who besides other and notorious lacks, public fame has charged with the murder of your late husband, besides the touching of yourself also in some part, though we trust in that behalf falsely.

these events led rapidly to marys defeat and imprisonment in lochleven castle. the scottish lords forced her to abdicate in favour of her son james vi, who had been born in june . james was taken to stirling castle to be raised as a protestant. mary escaped in  but after a defeat at langside sailed to england, where she had once been assured of support from elizabeth. elizabeths first instinct was to restore her fellow monarch, but she and her council instead chose to play safe. rather than risk returning mary to scotland with an english army or sending her to france and the catholic enemies of england, they detained her in england, where she was imprisoned for the next nineteen years.

mary was soon the focus for rebellion. in  there was a major catholic rising in the north; the goal was to free mary, marry her to thomas howard, th duke of norfolk, and put her on the english throne. after the rebels defeat, over  of them were executed on elizabeths orders. in the belief that the revolt had been successful, pope pius v issued a bull in , titled regnans in excelsis, which declared elizabeth, the pretended queen of england and the servant of crime to be excommunicated and a heretic, releasing all her subjects from any allegiance to her. catholics who obeyed her orders were threatened with excommunication. the papal bull provoked legislative initiatives against catholics by parliament, which were, however, mitigated by elizabeths intervention. in , to convert english subjects to catholicism with the intent to withdraw them from their allegiance to elizabeth was made a treasonable offence, carrying the death penalty. from the s missionary priests from continental seminaries went to england secretly in the cause of the reconversion of england. many suffered execution, engendering a cult of martyrdom.regnans in excelsis gave english catholics a strong incentive to look to mary as the legitimate sovereign of england. mary may not have been told of every catholic plot to put her on the english throne, but from the ridolfi plot of   to the babington plot of , elizabeths spymaster francis walsingham and the royal council keenly assembled a case against her. at first, elizabeth resisted calls for marys death. by late , she had been persuaded to sanction marys trial and execution on the evidence of letters written during the babington plot. elizabeths proclamation of the sentence announced that the said mary, pretending title to the same crown, had compassed and imagined within the same realm diverse things tending to the hurt, death and destruction of our royal person. on  february , mary was beheaded at fotheringhay castle, northamptonshire. after the execution, elizabeth claimed that she had not intended for the signed execution warrant to be dispatched, and blamed her secretary, william davison, for implementing it without her knowledge. the sincerity of elizabeths remorse and whether or not she wanted to delay the warrant have been called into question both by her contemporaries and later historians.

elizabeths foreign policy was largely defensive. the exception was the english occupation of le havre from october  to june , which ended in failure when elizabeths huguenot allies joined with the catholics to retake the port. elizabeths intention had been to exchange le havre for calais, lost to france in january . only through the activities of her fleets did elizabeth pursue an aggressive policy. this paid off in the war against spain,  of which was fought at sea. she knighted francis drake after his circumnavigation of the globe from  to , and he won fame for his raids on spanish ports and fleets. an element of piracy and selfenrichment drove elizabethan seafarers, over whom the queen had little control.

after the occupation and loss of le havre in , elizabeth avoided military expeditions on the continent until , when she sent an english army to aid the protestant dutch rebels against philip ii. this followed the deaths in  of the queens allies william the silent, prince of orange, and the duke of anjou, and the surrender of a series of dutch towns to alexander farnese, duke of parma, philips governor of the spanish netherlands. in december , an alliance between philip ii and the french catholic league at joinville undermined the ability of anjous brother, henry iii of france, to counter spanish domination of the netherlands. it also extended spanish influence along the channel coast of france, where the catholic league was strong, and exposed england to invasion. the siege of antwerp in the summer of  by the duke of parma necessitated some reaction on the part of the english and the dutch. the outcome was the treaty of nonsuch of august , in which elizabeth promised military support to the dutch. the treaty marked the beginning of the anglospanish war, which lasted until the treaty of london in .

the expedition was led by elizabeths former suitor, the earl of leicester. elizabeth from the start did not really back this course of action. her strategy, to support the dutch on the surface with an english army, while beginning secret peace talks with spain within days of leicesters arrival in holland, had necessarily to be at odds with leicesters, who had set up a protectorate and was expected by the dutch to fight an active campaign. elizabeth, on the other hand, wanted him to avoid at all costs any decisive action with the enemy. he enraged elizabeth by accepting the post of governorgeneral from the dutch states general. elizabeth saw this as a dutch ploy to force her to accept sovereignty over the netherlands, which so far she had always declined. she wrote to leicester

we could never have imagined  that a man raised up by ourself and extraordinarily favoured by us, above any other subject of this land, would have in so contemptible a sort broken our commandment in a cause that so greatly touches us in honour ... and therefore our express pleasure and commandment is that, all delays and excuses laid apart, you do presently upon the duty of your allegiance obey and fulfill whatsoever the bearer hereof shall direct you to do in our name. whereof fail you not, as you will answer the contrary at your utmost peril.

elizabeths commandment was that her emissary read out her letters of disapproval publicly before the dutch council of state, leicester having to stand nearby. this public humiliation of her lieutenantgeneral combined with her continued talks for a separate peace with spain irreversibly undermined leicesters standing among the dutch. the military campaign was severely hampered by elizabeths repeated refusals to send promised funds for her starving soldiers. her unwillingness to commit herself to the cause, leicesters own shortcomings as a political and military leader, and the factionridden and chaotic situation of dutch politics led to the failure of the campaign. leicester finally resigned his command in december .

meanwhile, francis drake had undertaken a major voyage against spanish ports and ships in the caribbean in  and . in  he made a successful raid on cdiz, destroying the spanish fleet of war ships intended for the enterprise of england, as philip ii had decided to take the war to england.on  july , the spanish armada, a great fleet of ships, set sail for the channel, planning to ferry a spanish invasion force under the duke of parma to the coast of southeast england from the netherlands. the armada was defeated by a combination of miscalculation, misfortune, and an attack of english fire ships off gravelines at midnight on  july , which dispersed the spanish ships to the northeast. the armada straggled home to spain in shattered remnants, after disastrous losses on the coast of ireland . unaware of the armadas fate, english militias mustered to defend the country under the earl of leicesters command. leicester invited elizabeth to inspect her troops at tilbury in essex on  august. wearing a silver breastplate over a white velvet dress, she addressed them in one of her most famous speeches

my loving people, we have been persuaded by some that are careful of our safety, to take heed how we commit ourself to armed multitudes for fear of treachery; but i assure you, i do not desire to live to distrust my faithful and loving people ... i know i have the body but of a weak and feeble woman, but i have the heart and stomach of a king, and of a king of england too, and think foul scorn that parma or spain, or any prince of europe should dare to invade the borders of my realm.

when no invasion came, the nation rejoiced. elizabeths procession to a thanksgiving service at st pauls cathedral rivalled that of her coronation as a spectacle. the defeat of the armada was a potent propaganda victory, both for elizabeth and for protestant england. the english took their delivery as a symbol of gods favour and of the nations inviolability under a virgin queen. however, the victory was not a turning point in the war, which continued and often favoured spain. the spanish still controlled the southern provinces of the netherlands, and the threat of invasion remained. walter raleigh claimed after her death that elizabeths caution had impeded the war against spain

if the late queen would have believed her men of war as she did her scribes, we had in her time beaten that great empire in pieces and made their kings of figs and oranges as in old times. but her majesty did all by halves, and by petty invasions taught the spaniard how to defend himself, and to see his own weakness.

though some historians have criticised elizabeth on similar grounds, raleighs verdict has more often been judged unfair. elizabeth had good reason not to place too much trust in her commanders, who once in action tended, as she put it herself, to be transported with an haviour of vainglory.in , the year after the spanish armada, elizabeth sent to spain the english armada or counter armada with , men and  ships, led by francis drake as admiral and john norreys as general. the english fleet suffered a catastrophic defeat with ,, killed, wounded or died of disease and  ships sunk or captured. the advantage england had won upon the destruction of the spanish armada was lost, and the spanish victory marked a revival of philip iis naval power through the next decade.

when the protestant henry iv inherited the french throne in , elizabeth sent him military support. it was her first venture into france since the retreat from le havre in . henrys succession was strongly contested by the catholic league and by philip ii, and elizabeth feared a spanish takeover of the channel ports.

the subsequent english campaigns in france, however, were disorganised and ineffective. peregrine bertie, largely ignoring elizabeths orders, roamed northern france to little effect, with an army of , men. he withdrew in disarray in december , having lost half his troops. in , the campaign of john norreys, who led , men to brittany, was even more of a disaster. as for all such expeditions, elizabeth was unwilling to invest in the supplies and reinforcements requested by the commanders. norreys left for london to plead in person for more support. in his absence, a catholic league army almost destroyed the remains of his army at craon, northwest france, in may .

in july, elizabeth sent out another force under robert devereux, nd earl of essex, to help henry iv in besieging rouen. the result was just as dismal. essex accomplished nothing and returned home in january . henry abandoned the siege in april. as usual, elizabeth lacked control over her commanders once they were abroad. where he is, or what he doth, or what he is to do, she wrote of essex, we are ignorant.

although ireland was one of her two kingdoms, elizabeth faced a hostile, and in places virtually autonomous, irish population that adhered to catholicism and was willing to defy her authority and plot with her enemies. her policy there was to grant land to her courtiers and prevent the rebels from giving spain a base from which to attack england. in the course of a series of uprisings, crown forces pursued scorchedearth tactics, burning the land and slaughtering man, woman and child. during a revolt in munster led by gerald fitzgerald, in , an estimated , irish people starved to death. the poet and colonist edmund spenser wrote that the victims were brought to such wretchedness as that any stony heart would have rued the same. elizabeth advised her commanders that the irish, that rude and barbarous nation, be well treated, but she or her commanders showed no remorse when force and bloodshed served their authoritarian purpose.between  and , elizabeth faced her most severe test in ireland during the nine years war, a revolt that took place at the height of hostilities with spain, who backed the rebel leader, hugh oneill. in spring , elizabeth sent robert devereux, to put the revolt down. to her frustration, he made little progress and returned to england in defiance of her orders. he was replaced by charles blount, who took three years to defeat the rebels. oneill finally surrendered in , a few days after elizabeths death. soon afterwards, a peace treaty was signed between england and spain.

elizabeth continued to maintain the diplomatic relations with the tsardom of russia that were originally established by her halfbrother, edward vi. she often wrote to tsar ivan the terrible on amicable terms, though the tsar was often annoyed by her focus on commerce rather than on the possibility of a military alliance. ivan even proposed to her once, and during his later reign, asked for a guarantee to be granted asylum in england should his rule be jeopardised. english merchant and explorer anthony jenkinson, who began his career as a representative of the muscovy company, became the queens special ambassador to the court of tsar ivan.upon his death in , ivan was succeeded by his son feodor i. unlike his father, feodor had no enthusiasm in maintaining exclusive trading rights with england. he declared his kingdom open to all foreigners, and dismissed the english ambassador jerome bowes, whose pomposity had been tolerated by ivan. elizabeth sent a new ambassador, dr. giles fletcher, to demand from the regent boris godunov that he convince the tsar to reconsider. the negotiations failed, due to fletcher addressing feodor with two of his many titles omitted. elizabeth continued to appeal to feodor in half appealing, half reproachful letters. she proposed an alliance, something which she had refused to do when offered one by feodors father, but was turned down.

trade and diplomatic relations developed between england and the barbary states during the rule of elizabeth. england established a trading relationship with morocco in opposition to spain, selling armour, ammunition, timber, and metal in exchange for moroccan sugar, in spite of a papal ban. in , abd elouahed ben messaoud, the principal secretary to the moroccan ruler mulai ahmad almansur, visited england as an ambassador to the english court, to negotiate an anglomoroccan alliance against spain. elizabeth agreed to sell munitions supplies to morocco, and she and mulai ahmad almansur talked on and off about mounting a joint operation against the spanish. discussions, however, remained inconclusive, and both rulers died within two years of the embassy.diplomatic relations were also established with the ottoman empire with the chartering of the levant company and the dispatch of the first english ambassador to the sublime porte, william harborne, in . for the first time, a treaty of commerce was signed in . numerous envoys were dispatched in both directions and epistolar exchanges occurred between elizabeth and sultan murad iii. in one correspondence, murad entertained the notion that protestantism and islam had much more in common than either did with roman catholicism, as both rejected the worship of idols, and argued for an alliance between england and the ottoman empire. to the dismay of catholic europe, england exported tin and lead  and ammunitions to the ottoman empire, and elizabeth seriously discussed joint military operations with murad iii during the outbreak of war with spain in , as francis walsingham was lobbying for a direct ottoman military involvement against the common spanish enemy.

in , humphrey gilbert sailed west to establish a colony in newfoundland. he never returned to england. gilberts halfbrother walter raleigh explored the atlantic coast and claimed the territory of virginia, perhaps named in honour of elizabeth, the virgin queen. this territory was much larger than the presentday state of virginia, extending from new england to the carolinas. in , raleigh returned to virginia with a small group of people. they landed on roanoke island, off presentday north carolina. after the failure of the first colony, raleigh recruited another group and put john white in command. when raleigh returned in , there was no trace of the roanoke colony he had left, but it was the first english settlement in north america.

the east india company was formed to trade in the indian ocean region and china, and received its charter from queen elizabeth on  december . for a period of  years, the company was awarded a monopoly on english trade with all countries east of the cape of good hope and west of the straits of magellan. james lancaster commanded the first expedition in . the company eventually controlled half of world trade and substantial territory in india in the th and th centuries.

the period after the defeat of the spanish armada in  brought new difficulties for elizabeth that lasted until the end of her reign. the conflicts with spain and in ireland dragged on, the tax burden grew heavier, and the economy was hit by poor harvests and the cost of war. prices rose and the standard of living fell. during this time, repression of catholics intensified, and elizabeth authorised commissions in  to interrogate and monitor catholic householders. to maintain the illusion of peace and prosperity, she increasingly relied on internal spies and propaganda. in her last years, mounting criticism reflected a decline in the publics affection for her.

one of the causes for this second reign of elizabeth, as it is sometimes called, was the changed character of elizabeths governing body, the privy council in the s. a new generation was in power. with the exception of william cecil, baron burghley, the most important politicians had died around  the earl of leicester in ; francis walsingham in ; and christopher hatton in . factional strife in the government, which had not existed in a noteworthy form before the s, now became its hallmark. a bitter rivalry arose between robert devereux, the earl of essex, and robert cecil, son of lord burghley, with both being supported by their respective adherents. the struggle for the most powerful positions in the state marred the kingdoms politics. the queens personal authority was lessening, as is shown in the  affair of dr. lopez, her trusted physician. when he was wrongly accused by the earl of essex of treason out of personal pique, she could not prevent the doctors execution, although she had been angry about his arrest and seems not to have believed in his guilt.during the last years of her reign, elizabeth came to rely on the granting of monopolies as a costfree system of patronage, rather than asking parliament for more subsidies in a time of war. the practice soon led to pricefixing, the enrichment of courtiers at the publics expense, and widespread resentment. this culminated in agitation in the house of commons during the parliament of . in her famous golden speech of  november  at whitehall palace to a deputation of  members, elizabeth professed ignorance of the abuses, and won the members over with promises and her usual appeal to the emotions

who keeps their sovereign from the lapse of error, in which, by ignorance and not by intent they might have fallen, what thank they deserve, we know, though you may guess. and as nothing is more dear to us than the loving conservation of our subjects hearts, what an undeserved doubt might we have incurred if the abusers of our liberality, the thrallers of our people, the wringers of the poor, had not been told us

this same period of economic and political uncertainty, however, produced an unsurpassed literary flowering in england. the first signs of a new literary movement had appeared at the end of the second decade of elizabeths reign, with john lylys euphues and edmund spensers the shepheardes calender in . during the s, some of the great names of english literature entered their maturity, including william shakespeare and christopher marlowe. continuing into the jacobean era, the english theatre would reach its peak. the notion of a great elizabethan era depends largely on the builders, dramatists, poets, and musicians who were active during elizabeths reign. they owed little directly to the queen, who was never a major patron of the arts.as elizabeth aged, her image gradually changed. she was portrayed as belphoebe or astraea, and after the armada, as gloriana, the eternally youthful faerie queene of edmund spensers poem. elizabeth gave edmund spenser a pension; as this was unusual for her, it indicates that she liked his work. her painted portraits became less realistic and more a set of enigmatic icons that made her look much younger than she was. in fact, her skin had been scarred by smallpox in , leaving her half bald and dependent on wigs and cosmetics. her love of sweets and fear of dentists contributed to severe tooth decay and loss to such an extent that foreign ambassadors had a hard time understanding her speech. andr hurault de maisse, ambassador extraordinary from henry iv of france, reported an audience with the queen, during which he noticed, her teeth are very yellow and unequal ... and on the left side less than on the right. many of them are missing, so that one cannot understand her easily when she speaks quickly. yet he added, her figure is fair and tall and graceful in whatever she does; so far as may be she keeps her dignity, yet humbly and graciously withal. walter raleigh called her a lady whom time had surprised.

the more elizabeths beauty faded, the more her courtiers praised it. elizabeth was happy to play the part, but it is possible that in the last decade of her life she began to believe her own performance. she became fond and indulgent of the charming but petulant young earl of essex, who was leicesters stepson and took liberties with her for which she forgave him. she repeatedly appointed him to military posts despite his growing record of irresponsibility. after essexs desertion of his command in ireland in , elizabeth had him placed under house arrest and the following year deprived him of his monopolies. in february , essex tried to raise a rebellion in london. he intended to seize the queen but few rallied to his support, and he was beheaded on  february. elizabeth knew that her own misjudgements were partly to blame for this turn of events. an observer wrote in  her delight is to sit in the dark, and sometimes with shedding tears to bewail essex.

elizabeths senior adviser, lord burghley, died on  august . his political mantle passed to his son robert, who soon became the leader of the government. one task he addressed was to prepare the way for a smooth succession. since elizabeth would never name her successor, robert cecil was obliged to proceed in secret. he therefore entered into a coded negotiation with james vi of scotland, who had a strong but unrecognised claim. cecil coached the impatient james to humour elizabeth and secure the heart of the highest, to whose sex and quality nothing is so improper as either needless expostulations or over much curiosity in her own actions. the advice worked. jamess tone delighted elizabeth, who responded so trust i that you will not doubt but that your last letters are so acceptably taken as my thanks cannot be lacking for the same, but yield them to you in grateful sort. in historian j. e. neales view, elizabeth may not have declared her wishes openly to james, but she made them known with unmistakable if veiled phrases.

the queens health remained fair until the autumn of , when a series of deaths among her friends plunged her into a severe depression. in february , the death of catherine carey, countess of nottingham, the niece of her cousin and close friend lady knollys, came as a particular blow. in march, elizabeth fell sick and remained in a settled and unremovable melancholy, and sat motionless on a cushion for hours on end. when robert cecil told her that she must go to bed, she snapped must is not a word to use to princes, little man. she died on  march  at richmond palace, between two and three in the morning. a few hours later, cecil and the council set their plans in motion and proclaimed james king of england.while it has become normative to record elizabeths death as occurring in , following english calendar reform in the s, at the time england observed new years day on  march, commonly known as lady day. thus elizabeth died on the last day of the year  in the old calendar. the modern convention is to use the old style calendar for the day and month while using the new style calendar for the year.

elizabeths coffin was carried downriver at night to whitehall, on a barge lit with torches. at her funeral on  april, the coffin was taken to westminster abbey on a hearse drawn by four horses hung with black velvet. in the words of the chronicler john stow

westminster was surcharged with multitudes of all sorts of people in their streets, houses, windows, leads and gutters, that came out to see the obsequy, and when they beheld her statue lying upon the coffin, there was such a general sighing, groaning and weeping as the like hath not been seen or known in the memory of man.

elizabeth was interred in westminster abbey, in a tomb shared with her halfsister, mary i. the latin inscription on their tomb, regno consortes  urna, hic obdormimus elizabetha et maria sorores, in spe resurrectionis, translates to consorts in realm and tomb, here we sleep, elizabeth and mary, sisters, in hope of resurrection.

elizabeth was lamented by many of her subjects, but others were relieved at her death. expectations of king james started high but then declined. by the s, there was a nostalgic revival of the cult of elizabeth. elizabeth was praised as a heroine of the protestant cause and the ruler of a golden age. james was depicted as a catholic sympathiser, presiding over a corrupt court. the triumphalist image that elizabeth had cultivated towards the end of her reign, against a background of factionalism and military and economic difficulties, was taken at face value and her reputation inflated. godfrey goodman, bishop of gloucester, recalled when we had experience of a scottish government, the queen did seem to revive. then was her memory much magnified. elizabeths reign became idealised as a time when crown, church and parliament had worked in constitutional balance.the picture of elizabeth painted by her protestant admirers of the early th century has proved lasting and influential. her memory was also revived during the napoleonic wars, when the nation again found itself on the brink of invasion. in the victorian era, the elizabethan legend was adapted to the imperial ideology of the day, and in the midth century, elizabeth was a romantic symbol of the national resistance to foreign threat. historians of that period, such as j. e. neale  and a. l. rowse , interpreted elizabeths reign as a golden age of progress. neale and rowse also idealised the queen personally she always did everything right; her more unpleasant traits were ignored or explained as signs of stress.recent historians, however, have taken a more complicated view of elizabeth. her reign is famous for the defeat of the armada, and for successful raids against the spanish, such as those on cdiz in  and , but some historians point to military failures on land and at sea. in ireland, elizabeths forces ultimately prevailed, but their tactics stain her record. rather than as a brave defender of the protestant nations against spain and the habsburgs, she is more often regarded as cautious in her foreign policies. she offered very limited aid to foreign protestants and failed to provide her commanders with the funds to make a difference abroad.elizabeth established an english church that helped shape a national identity and remains in place today. those who praised her later as a protestant heroine overlooked her refusal to drop all practices of catholic origin from the church of england. historians note that in her day, strict protestants regarded the acts of settlement and uniformity of  as a compromise. in fact, elizabeth believed that faith was personal and did not wish, as francis bacon put it, to make windows into mens hearts and secret thoughts.though elizabeth followed a largely defensive foreign policy, her reign raised englands status abroad. she is only a woman, only mistress of half an island, marvelled pope sixtus v, and yet she makes herself feared by spain, by france, by the empire, by all. under elizabeth, the nation gained a new selfconfidence and sense of sovereignty, as christendom fragmented. elizabeth was the first tudor to recognise that a monarch ruled by popular consent. she therefore always worked with parliament and advisers she could trust to tell her the trutha style of government that her stuart successors failed to follow. some historians have called her lucky; she believed that god was protecting her. priding herself on being mere english, elizabeth trusted in god, honest advice, and the love of her subjects for the success of her rule. in a prayer, she offered thanks to god that

at a time when wars and seditions with grievous persecutions have vexed almost all kings and countries round about me, my reign hath been peacable, and my realm a receptacle to thy afflicted church. the love of my people hath appeared firm, and the devices of my enemies frustrate.

the president of the united states is the head of state and head of government of the united states, indirectly elected to a fouryear term via the electoral college. the officeholder leads the executive branch of the federal government and is the commanderinchief of the united states armed forces. since the office was established in ,  men have served in  presidencies. the first president, george washington, won a unanimous vote of the electoral college. grover cleveland served two nonconsecutive terms and is therefore counted as the nd and th president of the united states, giving rise to the discrepancy between the number of presidencies and the number of persons who have served as president. the incumbent president is joe biden.the presidency of william henry harrison, who died  days after taking office in , was the shortest in american history. franklin d. roosevelt served the longest, over twelve years, before dying early in his fourth term in . he is the only u.s. president to have served more than two terms. since the ratification of the twentysecond amendment to the united states constitution in , no person may be elected president more than twice, and no one who has served more than two years of a term to which someone else was elected may be elected more than once.four presidents died in office of natural causes , four were assassinated , and one resigned . john tyler was the first vice president to assume the presidency during a presidential term, and set the precedent that a vice president who does so becomes the fully functioning president with his presidency.throughout most of its history, american politics has been dominated by political parties. the constitution is silent on the issue of political parties, and at the time it came into force in , no organized parties existed. soon after the st congress convened, political factions began rallying around dominant washington administration officials, such as alexander hamilton and thomas jefferson. concerned about the capacity of political parties to destroy the fragile unity holding the nation together, washington remained unaffiliated with any political faction or party throughout his eightyear presidency. he was, and remains, the only u.s. president never affiliated with a political party.

stephen mark hawkins oam  is an australian former national champion, world champion and olympic gold medal winning lightweight rower.

hawkins senior rowing was from the lindisfarne rowing club near hobart. he commenced contesting the national lightweight single sculls title at the australian rowing championships in , coached by his father stephen hawkins snr. in  he beat out his tasmanian rival simon burgess and claimed his first national lightweight championship in the single sculls. he won that same title at australian rowing championships in  and . in  he placed second behind peter antonie in the heavyweight single sculls australian championship.from  to  he was the tasmanian state representative picked to race the presidents cup  the open heavyweight single scull  at the interstate regatta within the australian rowing championships. he won the interstate championship for tasmania in .

hawkins first competed at a fisa event at the  world rowing championships in his home state of tasmania  in a lightweight quad scull with burgess, gary lynagh and bruce hick. they won the bronze medal. the following year at vienna  that same crew  won gold and a world championship title. they rowed through the field and won by . seconds.in  hawkins was selected in the olympic heavyweight double scull with peter antonie to compete at barcelona . antonie, a veteran of  years of international competition was, like hawkins a lightweight and they were respectively australias  and  ranked scullers ahead of the heavyweights richard powell and jason day. the selectors felt that antonie would be unlikely to win the single scull event but using a weight corrected ergo score methodology determined that antonie and hawkins together could be competitive in the double. they prepared perfectly, raced superbly and won the olympic gold.for roudnice  and indianapolis  hawkins was selected as australias lightweight single sculler. he rowed to second place and a silver medal in  behind great britains peter haining. in  he finished in twelfth place.hawkins was inducted into the tasmanian sporting hall of fame in .

the chernobyl disaster began on  april  with the explosion of the no.  reactor of the chernobyl nuclear power plant, near the city of pripyat in the north of the ukrainian ssr, close to the border with the byelorussian ssr, in the soviet union. it is one of only two nuclear energy accidents rated at seventhe maximum severityon the international nuclear event scale, the other being the  fukushima nuclear disaster in japan. the initial emergency response and subsequent mitigation efforts involved more than , personnel and cost an estimated  billion roublesroughly us billion in , adjusted for inflation. it is considered the worst nuclear disaster in history.the accident occurred during a test of the steam turbines ability to power the emergency feedwater pumps in the event of a simultaneous loss of external power and coolant pipe rupture. following an accidental drop in reactor power to nearzero, the operators restarted the reactor in preparation for the turbine test with a prohibited control rod configuration. upon successful completion of the test, the reactor was then shut down for maintenance. due to a variety of factors, this action resulted in a power surge at the base of the reactor which brought about the rupture of reactor components and the loss of coolant. this process led to steam explosions and a meltdown, which destroyed the containment building. this was followed by a reactor core fire which lasted until  may , during which airborne radioactive contaminants were spread throughout the ussr and europe. in response to the initial accident, a kilometre  radius exclusion zone was created  hours after the accident, from which approximately , people were evacuated, primarily from pripyat. the exclusion zone was later increased to a radius of  kilometres , from which an additional , people were evacuated.following the reactor explosion, which killed two engineers and severely burned two more, an emergency operation to put out the fires and stabilize the surviving reactor began, during which  workers were hospitalized, of which  exhibited symptoms of acute radiation syndrome . among those hospitalized,  died within the following three months. in the following  years,  more workers  died of various causes mostly unrelated to radiation exposure.  childhood thyroid cancer deaths were attributed to the disaster as of . a united nations committee found that to date fewer than  deaths have resulted from the fallout. model predictions of the eventual total death toll in the coming decades vary. the most widely cited study conducted by the world health organization in  predicted , cancerrelated fatalities in ukraine, belarus and russia.following the disaster, pripyat was abandoned and eventually replaced by the new purposebuilt city of slavutych. the chernobyl nuclear power plant sarcophagus was built by december . it reduced the spread of radioactive contamination from the wreckage and protected it from weathering. the confinement shelter also provided radiological protection for the crews of the undamaged reactors at the site, which were restarted in late  and . however, this containment structure was only intended to last for  years, and required considerable reinforcement in the early s. the shelter was heavily supplemented in  by the chernobyl new safe confinement, which was constructed around the old structure. this larger enclosure aims to enable the removal of both the sarcophagus and the reactor debris while containing the radioactive materials inside. cleanup is scheduled for completion by .

in powergenerating operation, most of the heat generated in a nuclear reactor by its fuel rods is derived from nuclear fission, but a significant fraction  is derived from the radioactive decay of the accumulated fission products, a process known as decay heat. this decay heat continues for some time after the fission chain reaction has been stopped, such as following a reactor shutdown, either emergency or planned, and continued pumped circulation of coolant is essential to prevent core overheating, or in the worst case, core meltdown. rbmk reactors, like those at chernobyl, use water as a coolant, circulated by electrically driven pumps. the coolant flow rate is considerable  reactor no.  had  individual fuel channels, each requiring a coolant flow of  m/h  at full reactor power, for a total of over  million litres per hour  for the entire reactor.

in case of a total power loss at the station, each of chernobyls reactors had three backup diesel generators, but they took  seconds to attain full load and generate the .megawatt output required to run one main pump. in the interim, special counterweights on each pump would enable them to provide coolant via inertia, thereby bridging the gap to generator startup. however, a potential safety risk existed in the event that a station blackout occurred simultaneously with the rupture of a millimetre  coolant pipe . in this scenario the emergency core cooling system  needed to pump additional water into the core, replacing coolant lost to evaporation.it had been theorized that the rotational momentum of the reactors steam turbine could be used to generate the required electrical power to operate the eccs via the feedwater pumps. the turbines speed would run down as energy was taken from it, but analysis indicated that there might be sufficient energy to provide electrical power to run the coolant pumps for  seconds. this would not quite bridge the gap between an external power failure and the full availability of the emergency generators, but would alleviate the situation.

the turbine rundown energy capability still needed to be confirmed experimentally, and previous tests had ended unsuccessfully. an initial test carried out in  indicated that the excitation voltage of the turbinegenerator was insufficient; it did not maintain the desired magnetic field after the turbine trip. the electrical system was modified, and the test was repeated in  but again proved unsuccessful. in , the test was conducted a third time but also yielded no results due to a problem with the recording equipment. the test procedure was to be run again in  and was scheduled to take place during a controlled powerdown of reactor no. , which was preparatory to a planned maintenance outage.a test procedure had been written, but the authors were not aware of the unusual rbmk reactor behaviour under the planned operating conditions. it was regarded as purely an electrical test of the generator, not a complex unit test, even though it involved critical unit systems. according to the regulations in place at the time, such a test did not require approval by either the chief design authority for the reactor  or the soviet nuclear safety regulator. the test program called for disabling the emergency core cooling system, a passive/active system of core cooling intended to provide water to the core in a lossofcoolant accident, and approval from the chernobyl site chief engineer had been obtained according to regulations.the test procedure was intended to run as follows

test preparation

the test would take place prior to a scheduled reactor shutdown

the reactor thermal power was to be reduced to between  mw and , mw 

the steamturbine generator was to be run at normal operating speed

four out of eight main circulating pumps were to be supplied with offsite power, while the other four would be powered by the turbineelectrical test

when the correct conditions were achieved, the steam supply to the turbine generator would be closed off, and the reactor would be shut down

the voltage provided by the coasting turbine would be measured, along with the voltage and rpms of the four main circulating pumps being powered by the turbine

when the emergency generators supplied full electrical power, the turbine generator would be allowed to continue freewheeling down

the test was to be conducted during the dayshift of  april  as part of a scheduled reactor shut down. the day shift crew had been instructed in advance on the reactor operating conditions to run the test, and, in addition, a special team of electrical engineers was present to conduct the oneminute test of the new voltage regulating system once the correct conditions had been reached. as planned, a gradual reduction in the output of the power unit began at  on  april, and the power level had reached  of its nominal , mw thermal level by the beginning of the day shift.the day shift performed many unrelated maintenance tasks, and was scheduled to perform the test at . preparations for the test were carried out, including the disabling of the emergency core cooling system. meanwhile, another regional power station unexpectedly went offline. at , the kiev electrical grid controller requested that the further reduction of chernobyls output be postponed, as power was needed to satisfy the peak evening demand, so the test was postponed.

soon, the day shift was replaced by the evening shift. despite the delay, the emergency core cooling system was left disabled. this system had to be disconnected via a manual isolating slide valve, which in practice meant that two or three people spent the whole shift manually turning sailboathelmsized valve wheels. the system would have no influence on the events that unfolded next, but allowing the reactor to run for  hours outside of the test without emergency protection was indicative of a general lack of safety culture.,at , the kiev grid controller allowed the reactor shutdown to resume. this delay had some serious consequences the day shift had long since departed, the evening shift was also preparing to leave, and the night shift would not take over until midnight, well into the job. according to plan, the test should have been finished during the day shift, and the night shift would only have had to maintain decay heat cooling systems in an otherwise shutdown plant.the night shift had very limited time to prepare for and carry out the experiment. anatoly dyatlov, deputy chiefengineer of the chernobyl nuclear power plant, was present to supervise and direct the test. he was one of the tests chief authors and he was the highestranking individual present. unit shift supervisor aleksandr akimov was in charge of the unit  night shift, and leonid toptunov was the senior reactor control engineer responsible for the reactors operational regimen, including the movement of the control rods. yearold toptunov had worked independently as a senior engineer for approximately three months.

the test plan called for a gradual decrease in reactor power to a thermal level of  mw, and an output of  mw was reached at  on  april. however, due to the reactors production of a fission byproduct, xenon, which is a reactioninhibiting neutron absorber, power continued to decrease in the absence of further operator action, a process known as reactor poisoning. in steadystate operation, this is avoided because xenon is burned off as quickly as it is created from decaying iodine by the absorption of neutrons from the ongoing chain reaction, becoming highly stable xenon. with the reactor power reduced, high quantities of previously produced iodine were decaying into the neutronabsorbing xenon faster than the reduced neutron flux could burn it off. xenon poisoning in this context made reactor control more difficult, but was a predictable and wellunderstood phenomenon during such a power reduction.

when the reactor power had decreased to approximately  mw, the reactor power control was switched from lar  to the automatic regulators, in order to manually maintain the required power level. ar then activated, removing all four of ars control rods automatically, but ar failed to activate due to an imbalance in its ionization chambers. in response, toptunov reduced power to stabilize the automatic regulators ionization sensors. the result was a sudden power drop to an unintended nearshutdown state, with a power output of  mw thermal or less. the exact circumstances that caused the power drop are unknown. most reports attribute the power drop to toptunovs error, but dyatlov reported that it was due to a fault in the ar system.the reactor was now producing only  of the minimum initial power level prescribed for the test. this low reactivity inhibited the burnoff of xenon within the reactor core and hindered the rise of reactor power. to increase power, controlroom personnel removed numerous control rods from the reactor. several minutes elapsed before the reactor was restored to  mw at , at which point most control rods were at their upper limits, but the rod configuration was still within its normal operating limit, with operational reactivity margin  equivalent to having more than  rods inserted. over the next twenty minutes, reactor power would be increased further to  mw.the operation of the reactor at the low power level  was accompanied by unstable core temperatures and coolant flow, and, possibly, by instability of neutron flux. the control room received repeated emergency signals regarding the low levels in one half of the steam/water separator drums, with accompanying drum separator pressure warnings. in response, personnel triggered several rapid influxes of feedwater. relief valves opened to relieve excess steam into a turbine condenser.

when a power level of  mw was reattained, preparation for the experiment continued, although the power level was much lower than the prescribed  mw. as part of the test program, two additional main circulating  pumps were activated at . the increased coolant flow lowered the overall core temperature and reduced the existing steam voids in the core. because water absorbs neutrons better than steam, the neutron flux and reactivity decreased. the operators responded by removing more manual control rods to maintain power. it was around this time that the number of control rods inserted in the reactor fell below the required value of . this was not apparent to the operators, because the rbmk did not have any instruments capable of calculating the inserted rod worth in real time.

the combined effect of these various actions was an extremely unstable reactor configuration. nearly all of the  control rods had been extracted manually, and excessively high coolant flow rates through the core meant that the coolant was entering the reactor very close to the boiling point. unlike other lightwater reactor designs, the rbmk design at that time had a positive void coefficient of reactivity at low power levels. this meant that the formation of steam bubbles  from boiling cooling water intensified the nuclear chain reaction owing to voids having lower neutron absorption than water. unbeknownst to the operators, the void coefficient was not counterbalanced by other reactivity effects in the given operating regime, meaning that any increase in boiling would produce more steam voids which further intensified the chain reaction, leading to a positive feedback loop. given this characteristic, reactor no.  was now at risk of a runaway increase in its core power with nothing to restrain it. the reactor was now very sensitive to the regenerative effect of steam voids on reactor power.,

at , the test began. four of the eight main circulating pumps  were to be powered by voltage from the coasting turbine, while the remaining four pumps received electrical power from the grid as normal. the steam to the turbines was shut off, beginning a rundown of the turbine generator. the diesel generators started and sequentially picked up loads; the generators were to have completely picked up the mcps power needs by . as the momentum of the turbine generator decreased, so did the power it produced for the pumps. the water flow rate decreased, leading to increased formation of steam voids in the coolant flowing up through the fuel pressure tubes.

at , as recorded by the skala centralized control system, a scram  of the reactor was initiated as the experiment was wrapping up. the scram was started when the az button  of the reactor emergency protection system was pressed this engaged the drive mechanism on all control rods to fully insert them, including the manual control rods that had been withdrawn earlier.

the personnel had already intended to shut down using the az button in preparation for scheduled maintenance and the scram likely preceded the sharp increase in power. however, the precise reason why the button was pressed when it was is not certain, as only the deceased akimov and toptunov partook in that decision, though the atmosphere in the control room was calm at that moment. meanwhile, the rbmk designers claim that the button had to have been pressed only after the reactor already began to selfdestruct.

when the az button was pressed, the insertion of control rods into the reactor core began. the control rod insertion mechanism moved the rods at . metres per second , so that the rods took  to  seconds to travel the full height of the core, about  metres . a bigger problem was the design of the rbmk control rods, each of which had a graphite neutron moderator section attached to its end to boost reactor output by displacing water when the control rod section had been fully withdrawn from the reactor. that is, when a control rod was at maximum extraction, a neutronmoderating graphite extension was centered in the core with . metres  columns of water above and below it.consequently, injecting a control rod downward into the reactor in a scram initially displaced neutronabsorbing water in the lower portion of the reactor with neutronmoderating graphite. thus, an emergency scram could initially increase the reaction rate in the lower part of the core. this behaviour was discovered when the initial insertion of control rods in another rbmk reactor at ignalina nuclear power plant in  induced a power spike. procedural countermeasures were not implemented in response to ignalina. the iaea investigative report insag later stated, apparently, there was a widespread view that the conditions under which the positive scram effect would be important would never occur. however, they did appear in almost every detail in the course of the actions leading to the chernobyl accident.a few seconds into the scram, a power spike did occur, and the core overheated, causing some of the fuel rods to fracture. some have speculated that this also blocked the control rod columns, jamming them at onethird insertion. within three seconds the reactor output rose above  mw.instruments did not register the subsequent course of events; it was reconstructed through mathematical simulation. per the simulation, the power spike would have caused an increase in fuel temperature and steam buildup, leading to a rapid increase in steam pressure. this caused the fuel cladding to fail, releasing the fuel elements into the coolant and rupturing the channels in which these elements were located.

as the scram continued, the reactor output jumped to around , mw thermal,  times its normal operational output, the indicated last reading on the power meter on the control panel. some estimate the power spike may have gone  times higher than that. it was not possible to reconstruct the precise sequence of the processes that led to the destruction of the reactor and the power unit building, but a steam explosion, like the explosion of a steam boiler from excess vapour pressure, appears to have been the next event. there is a general understanding that it was explosive steam pressure from the damaged fuel channels escaping into the reactors exterior cooling structure that caused the explosion that destroyed the reactor casing, tearing off and blasting the upper plate called the upper biological shield, to which the entire reactor assembly is fastened, through the roof of the reactor building. this is believed to be the first explosion that many heard.this explosion ruptured further fuel channels, as well as severing most of the coolant lines feeding the reactor chamber, and as a result, the remaining coolant flashed to steam and escaped the reactor core. the total water loss combined with a high positive void coefficient further increased the reactors thermal power.a second, more powerful explosion occurred about two or three seconds after the first; this explosion dispersed the damaged core and effectively terminated the nuclear chain reaction. this explosion also compromised more of the reactor containment vessel and ejected hot lumps of graphite moderator. the ejected graphite and the demolished channels still in the remains of the reactor vessel caught fire on exposure to air, significantly contributing to the spread of radioactive fallout and the contamination of outlying areas. the explosion is estimated to have had the power equivalent of  tons of tnt.according to observers outside unit , burning lumps of material and sparks shot into the air above the reactor. some of them fell onto the roof of the machine hall and started a fire. about  of the redhot graphite blocks and overheated material from the fuel channels was ejected. parts of the graphite blocks and fuel channels were out of the reactor building. as a result of the damage to the building, an airflow through the core was established by the cores high temperature. the air ignited the hot graphite and started a graphite fire.after the larger explosion, several employees at the power station went outside to get a clearer view of the extent of the damage. one such survivor, alexander yuvchenko, recounts that once he stepped out and looked up towards the reactor hall, he saw a very beautiful laserlike beam of blue light caused by the ionizedair glow that appeared to be flooding up into infinity.there were initially several hypotheses about the nature of the second explosion. one view was that the second explosion was caused by the combustion of hydrogen, which had been produced either by the overheated steamzirconium reaction or by the reaction of redhot graphite with steam that produced hydrogen and carbon monoxide. another hypothesis, by konstantin checherov, published in , was that the second explosion was a thermal explosion of the reactor due to the uncontrollable escape of fast neutrons caused by the complete water loss in the reactor core.

contrary to safety regulations, bitumen, a combustible material, had been used in the construction of the roof of the reactor building and the turbine hall. ejected material ignited at least five fires on the roof of the adjacent reactor no. , which was still operating. it was imperative to put those fires out and protect the cooling systems of reactor no. . inside reactor no. , the chief of the night shift, yuri bagdasarov, wanted to shut down the reactor immediately, but chief engineer nikolai fomin would not allow this. the operators were given respirators and potassium iodide tablets and told to continue working. at , bagdasarov made his own decision to shut down the reactor, which was confirmed in writing by dyatlov and station shift supervisor rogozhkin.

shortly after the accident, firefighters arrived to try to extinguish the fires. first on the scene was a chernobyl power station firefighter brigade under the command of lieutenant volodymyr pravyk, who died on  may  of acute radiation sickness. they were not told how dangerously radioactive the smoke and the debris were, and may not even have known that the accident was anything more than a regular electrical fire we didnt know it was the reactor. no one had told us. grigorii khmel, the driver of one of the fire engines, later described what happened

we arrived there at  or  minutes to two in the morning ... we saw graphite scattered about. misha asked is that graphite i kicked it away. but one of the fighters on the other truck picked it up. its hot, he said. the pieces of graphite were of different sizes, some big, some small enough to pick them up ... we didnt know much about radiation. even those who worked there had no idea. there was no water left in the trucks. misha filled a cistern and we aimed the water at the top. then those boys who died went up to the roofvashchik, kolya and others, and volodya pravik ... they went up the ladder ... and i never saw them again.

anatoli zakharov, a fireman stationed in chernobyl since , offered a different description in  i remember joking to the others, there must be an incredible amount of radiation here. well be lucky if were all still alive in the morning. he also stated, of course we knew if wed followed regulations, we would never have gone near the reactor. but it was a moral obligationour duty. we were like kamikaze.the immediate priority was to extinguish fires on the roof of the station and the area around the building containing reactor no.  to protect no.  and keep its core cooling systems intact. the fires were extinguished by , but many firefighters received high doses of radiation. the fire inside reactor no.  continued to burn until  may ; it is possible that well over half of the graphite burned out.it was thought by some that the core fire was extinguished by a combined effort of helicopters dropping more than , tonnes  of sand, lead, clay, and neutronabsorbing boron onto the burning reactor. it is now known that virtually none of these materials reached the core. historians estimate that about  soviet pilots risked dangerous levels of radiation to fly the thousands of flights needed to cover reactor no.  in this attempt to seal off radiation.from eyewitness accounts of the firefighters involved before they died , one described his experience of the radiation as tasting like metal, and feeling a sensation similar to that of pins and needles all over his face. this is consistent with the description given by louis slotin, a manhattan project physicist who died days after a fatal radiation overdose from a criticality accident.the explosion and fire threw hot particles of the nuclear fuel and also far more dangerous fission products  into the air. the residents of the surrounding area observed the radioactive cloud on the night of the explosion.

the ionizing radiation levels in the worsthit areas of the reactor building have been estimated to be . roentgens per second , equivalent to more than , roentgens per hour. a lethal dose is around  roentgens  over five hours, so in some areas, unprotected workers received fatal doses in less than a minute. unfortunately, a dosimeter capable of measuring up to , r/s was buried in the rubble of a collapsed part of the building, and another one failed when turned on. most remaining dosimeters had limits of . r/s and therefore read off scale. thus, the reactor crew could ascertain only that the radiation levels were somewhere above . r/s , while the true levels were much higher in some areas.because of the inaccurate low readings, the reactor crew chief aleksandr akimov assumed that the reactor was intact. the evidence of pieces of graphite and reactor fuel lying around the building was ignored, and the readings of another dosimeter brought in by  were dismissed under the assumption that the new dosimeter must have been defective. akimov stayed with his crew in the reactor building until morning, sending members of his crew to try to pump water into the reactor. none of them wore any protective gear. most, including akimov, died from radiation exposure within three weeks.

the nearby city of pripyat was not immediately evacuated. the townspeople, in the early hours of the morning, at  local time, went about their usual business, completely oblivious to what had just happened. however, within a few hours of the explosion, dozens of people fell ill. later, they reported severe headaches and metallic tastes in their mouths, along with uncontrollable fits of coughing and vomiting. as the plant was run by authorities in moscow, the government of ukraine did not receive prompt information on the accident.valentyna shevchenko, then chairwoman of the presidium of verkhovna rada of the ukrainian ssr, recalls that ukraines acting minister of internal affairs vasyl durdynets phoned her at work at  to report current affairs; only at the end of the conversation did he add that there had been a fire at the chernobyl nuclear power plant, but it was extinguished and everything was fine. when shevchenko asked how are the people, he replied that there was nothing to be concerned about some are celebrating a wedding, others are gardening, and others are fishing in the pripyat river.shevchenko then spoke over the phone to volodymyr shcherbytsky, general secretary of the communist party of ukraine and de facto head of state, who said he anticipated a delegation of the state commission headed by boris shcherbina, the deputy chairman of the council of ministers of the ussr.

a commission was established later in the day to investigate the accident. it was headed by valery legasov, first deputy director of the kurchatov institute of atomic energy, and included leading nuclear specialist evgeny velikhov, hydrometeorologist yuri izrael, radiologist leonid ilyin, and others. they flew to boryspil international airport and arrived at the power plant in the evening of  april. by that time two people had already died and  were hospitalized. the delegation soon had ample evidence that the reactor was destroyed and extremely high levels of radiation had caused a number of cases of radiation exposure. in the early daylight hours of  april, approximately  hours after the initial blast, they ordered the evacuation of pripyat. initially it was decided to evacuate the population for three days; later this was made permanent.

by  on  april, buses had arrived in pripyat to start the evacuation. the evacuation began at . a translated excerpt of the evacuation announcement follows

for the attention of the residents of pripyat the city council informs you that due to the accident at chernobyl power station in the city of pripyat the radioactive conditions in the vicinity are deteriorating. the communist party, its officials and the armed forces are taking necessary steps to combat this. nevertheless, with the view to keep people as safe and healthy as possible, the children being top priority, we need to temporarily evacuate the citizens in the nearest towns of kiev region. for these reasons, starting from  april ,  each apartment block will be able to have a bus at its disposal, supervised by the police and the city officials. it is highly advisable to take your documents, some vital personal belongings and a certain amount of food, just in case, with you. the senior executives of public and industrial facilities of the city has decided on the list of employees needed to stay in pripyat to maintain these facilities in a good working order. all the houses will be guarded by the police during the evacuation period. comrades, leaving your residences temporarily please make sure you have turned off the lights, electrical equipment and water and shut the windows. please keep calm and orderly in the process of this shortterm evacuation.

to expedite the evacuation, residents were told to bring only what was necessary, and that they would remain evacuated for approximately three days. as a result, most personal belongings were left behind, and residents were only allowed to recover certain items after months had passed. by , , people were evacuated to various villages of the kiev region. the next day, talks began for evacuating people from the kilometre  zone. ten days after the accident, the evacuation area was expanded to  kilometres ., the chernobyl nuclear power plant exclusion zone has remained ever since, although its shape has changed and its size has been expanded.

the surveying and detection of isolated fallout hotspots outside this zone over the following year eventually resulted in , longterm evacuees in total agreeing to be moved. the years between  and  saw the near tripling in the total number of permanently resettled persons from the most severely contaminated areas to approximately ,.

evacuation began one and a half days before the accident was publicly acknowledged by the soviet union. in the morning of  april, radiation levels set off alarms at the forsmark nuclear power plant in sweden, over , kilometres  from the chernobyl plant. workers at forsmark reported the case to the swedish radiation safety authority, which determined that the radiation had originated elsewhere. that day, the swedish government contacted the soviet government to inquire about whether there had been a nuclear accident in the soviet union. the soviets initially denied it, and it was only after the swedish government suggested they were about to file an official alert with the international atomic energy agency, that the soviet government admitted that an accident had taken place at chernobyl.at first, the soviets only conceded that a minor accident had occurred, but once they began evacuating more than , people, the full scale of the situation was realized by the global community. at  the evening of  april, a second announcement was read in the tv news programme vremya there has been an accident at the chernobyl nuclear power plant. one of the nuclear reactors was damaged. the effects of the accident are being remedied. assistance has been provided for any affected people. an investigative commission has been set up.this was the entire announcement, and the first time the soviet union officially announced a nuclear accident. the telegraph agency of the soviet union  then discussed the three mile island accident and other american nuclear accidents, which serge schmemann of the new york times wrote was an example of the common soviet tactic of whataboutism. the mention of a commission also indicated to observers the seriousness of the incident, and subsequent state radio broadcasts were replaced with classical music, which was a common method of preparing the public for an announcement of a tragedy in the ussr.around the same time, abc news released its report about the disaster. shevchenko was the first of the ukrainian state top officials to arrive at the disaster site early on  april. there she spoke with members of medical staff and people, who were calm and hopeful that they could soon return to their homes. shevchenko returned home near midnight, stopping at a radiological checkpoint in vilcha, one of the first that were set up soon after the accident.there was a notification from moscow that there was no reason to postpone the  may international workers day celebrations in kiev , but on  april a meeting of the political bureau of the central committee of the cpsu took place to discuss the plan for the upcoming celebration. scientists were reporting that the radiological background level in kiev was normal. at the meeting, which was finished at , it was decided to shorten celebrations from the regular three and a half to four hours to under two hours.several buildings in pripyat were officially kept open after the disaster to be used by workers still involved with the plant. these included the jupiter factory  and the azure swimming pool, used by the chernobyl liquidators for recreation during the cleanup .

two floors of bubbler pools beneath the reactor served as a large water reservoir for the emergency cooling pumps and as a pressure suppression system capable of condensing steam in case of a small broken steam pipe; the third floor above them, below the reactor, served as a steam tunnel. the steam released by a broken pipe was supposed to enter the steam tunnel and be led into the pools to bubble through a layer of water. after the disaster, the pools and the basement were flooded because of ruptured cooling water pipes and accumulated firefighting water.

the smoldering graphite, fuel and other material above, at more than , c , started to burn through the reactor floor and mixed with molten concrete from the reactor lining, creating corium, a radioactive semiliquid material comparable to lava. it was feared that if this mixture melted through the floor into the pool of water, the resulting steam production would further contaminate the area or even cause a steam explosion, ejecting more radioactive material from the reactor. it became necessary to drain the pool. these fears ultimately proved unfounded, since corium began dripping harmlessly into the flooded bubbler pools before the water could be removed. the molten fuel hit the water and cooled into a lightbrown ceramic pumice, whose low density allowed the substance to float on the waters surface.unaware of this fact, the government commission directed that the bubbler pools be drained by opening its sluice gates. the valves controlling it, however, were located in a flooded corridor in a subterranean annex adjacent to the reactor building. volunteers in diving suits and respirators , and equipped with dosimeters, entered the kneedeep radioactive water and managed to open the valves. these were the engineers alexei ananenko and valeri bezpalov , accompanied by the shift supervisor boris baranov. all three men were awarded the order for courage by ukrainian president petro poroshenko in may .numerous media reports falsely suggested that all three men died just days after the incident. in fact all three survived and continued to work in the nuclear energy industry. alexy ananenko and valeri bezpalov were still alive as of , while baranov had died of heart failure in  at age . 

once the bubbler pool gates were opened by the three volunteers, fire brigade pumps were then used to drain the basement. the operation was not completed until  may, after , tonnes  of water were pumped out.

the government commission was concerned that the molten core would burn into the earth and contaminate groundwater below the reactor. to reduce the likelihood of this, it was decided to freeze the earth beneath the reactor, which would also stabilize the foundations. using oil well drilling equipment, the injection of liquid nitrogen began on  may. it was estimated that  tonnes  of liquid nitrogen per day would be required to keep the soil frozen at  c . this idea was quickly scrapped.as an alternative, subway builders and coal miners were deployed to excavate a tunnel below the reactor to make room for a cooling system. the final makeshift design for the cooling system was to incorporate a coiled formation of pipes cooled with water and covered on top with a thin thermally conductive graphite layer. the graphite layer as a natural refractory material would prevent the concrete above from melting. this graphite cooling plate layer was to be encapsulated between two concrete layers, each  metre  thick for stabilisation. this system was designed by leonid bolshov, the director of the institute for nuclear safety and development formed in . bolshovs graphiteconcrete sandwich would be similar in concept to later core catchers that are now part of many nuclear reactor designs.bolshovs graphite cooling plate, alongside the prior nitrogen injection proposal, were not used following the drop in aerial temperatures and indicative reports that the fuel melt had stopped. it was later determined that the fuel had flowed three floors, with a few cubic meters coming to rest at ground level. the precautionary underground channel with its active cooling was therefore deemed redundant, as the fuel was selfcooling. the excavation was then simply filled with concrete to strengthen the foundation below the reactor.

in the months after the explosion, attention turned to removing the radioactive debris from the roof. while the worst of the radioactive debris had remained inside what was left of the reactor, it was estimated that there was approximately  tons of debris on that roof which had to be removed to enable the safe construction of the sarcophagusa concrete structure that would entomb the reactor and reduce radioactive dust being released into the atmosphere. the initial plan was to use robots to clear the debris off the roof. the soviets used approximately  remotecontrolled robots, most of them built in the soviet union itself. many failed due to the difficult terrain, combined with the effect of high radiation fields on their batteries and electronic controls. in , valery legasov, first deputy director of the kurchatov institute of atomic energy in moscow, said we learned that robots are not the great remedy for everything. where there was very high radiation, the robot ceased to be a robotthe electronics quit working.consequently, the most highly radioactive materials were shoveled by chernobyl liquidators from the military wearing heavy protective gear . these soldiers could only spend a maximum of  seconds working on the rooftops of the surrounding buildings because of the extremely high doses of radiation given off by the blocks of graphite and other debris. though the soldiers were only supposed to perform the role of the biorobot a maximum of once, some soldiers reported having done this task five or six times. only  of the debris cleared from the roof was performed by robots; the other  was removed by  , men who absorbed, on average, an estimated dose of  rem  of radiation each.

with the extinguishing of the open air reactor fire, the next step was to prevent the spread of contamination. this could be due to wind action which could carry away loose contamination, and by birds which could land within the wreckage and then carry contamination elsewhere. in addition, rainwater could wash contamination away from the reactor area and into the subsurface water table, where it could migrate outside the site area. rainwater falling on the wreckage could also weaken the remaining reactor structure by accelerating corrosion of steelwork. a further challenge was to reduce the large amount of emitted gamma radiation, which was a hazard to the workforce operating the adjacent reactor no. .the solution chosen was to enclose the wrecked reactor by the construction of a huge composite steel and concrete shelter, which became known as the sarcophagus. it had to be erected quickly and within the constraints of high levels of ambient gamma radiation. the design started on  may ,  days after the disaster, and construction was from june to late november. this major construction project was carried out under the very difficult circumstances of high levels of radiation both from the core remnants and the deposited radioactive contamination around it. 

the construction workers had to be protected from radiation, and techniques such as crane drivers working from leadlined control cabins were employed. the construction work included erecting walls around the perimeter, clearing and surface concreting the surrounding ground to remove sources of radiation and to allow access for large construction machinery, constructing a thick radiation shielding wall to protect the workers in reactor no. , fabricating a highrise buttress to strengthen weak parts of the old structure, constructing an overall roof, and provisioning a ventilation extract system to capture any airborne contamination arising within the shelter.

during the construction of the sarcophagus, a scientific team, as part of an investigation dubbed complex expedition, reentered the reactor to locate and contain nuclear fuel to prevent another explosion. these scientists manually collected cold fuel rods, but great heat was still emanating from the core. rates of radiation in different parts of the building were monitored by drilling holes into the reactor and inserting long metal detector tubes. the scientists were exposed to high levels of radiation and radioactive dust.in december , after six months of investigation, the team discovered with the help of a remote camera that an intensely radioactive mass more than  metres  wide had formed in the basement of unit four. the mass was called the elephants foot for its wrinkled appearance. it was composed of melted sand, concrete, and a large amount of nuclear fuel that had escaped from the reactor. the concrete beneath the reactor was steaming hot, and was breached by nowsolidified lava and spectacular unknown crystalline forms termed chernobylite. it was concluded that there was no further risk of explosion.

the official contaminated zones saw a massive cleanup effort lasting seven months. the official reason for such early  decontamination efforts, rather than allowing time for natural decay, was that the land must be repopulated and brought back into cultivation. within fifteen months  of the land was under cultivation, even though only a third of the evacuated villages were resettled. defence forces must have done much of the work. yet this land was of marginal agricultural value. according to historian david marples, the administration had a psychological purpose for the cleanup they wished to forestall panic regarding nuclear energy, and even to restart the chernobyl power station.,,although a number of radioactive emergency vehicles were buried in trenches, many of the vehicles used by the liquidators, including the helicopters, still remained, as of , parked in a field in the chernobyl area. scavengers have since removed many functioning, but highly radioactive, parts. liquidators worked under deplorable conditions, poorly informed and with poor protection. many, if not most of them, exceeded radiation safety limits.the urban decontamination liquidators first washed buildings and roads with barda, a sticky polymerizing fluid, designed to entrap radioactive dust.a unique clean up medal was given to the cleanup workers, known as liquidators.

to investigate the causes of the accident the iaea used the international nuclear safety advisory group , which had been created by the iaea in . it produced two significant reports on chernobyl; insag in , and a revised report, insag in . in summary, according to insag, the main cause of the accident was the operators actions, but according to insag, the main cause was the reactors design.

both iaea reports identified an inadequate safety culture  at all managerial and operational levels as a major underlying factor of different aspects of the accident. this was stated to be inherent not only in operations but also during design, engineering, construction, manufacture and regulation.,views of the main causes were heavily lobbied by different groups, including the reactors designers, power plant personnel, and the soviet and ukrainian governments. this was due to the uncertainty about the actual sequence of events and plant parameters. after insag more information became available, and more powerful computing has allowed better forensic simulations.the insag conclusion of major factors contributory to the accident was

the accident is now seen to have been the result of concurrence of the following major factors specific physical characteristics of the reactor; specific design features of the reactor control elements; and the fact that the reactor was brought to a state not specified by procedures or investigated by an independent safety body. most importantly, the physical characteristics of the reactor made possible its unstable behaviour.

the first official soviet explanation of the accident was given by soviet scientists and engineers to representatives of iaea member states and other international organisations at the first postaccident review meeting, held at the iaea in vienna  august . this explanation effectively placed the blame on the power plant operators. the iaea insag report followed shortly afterwards in september , and on the whole also supported this view, based also on the information provided in discussions with the soviet experts at the vienna review meeting. in this view, the catastrophic accident was caused by gross violations of operating rules and regulations. for instance; during preparation and testing of the turbine generator under rundown conditions using the auxiliary load, personnel disconnected a series of technical protection systems and breached the most important operational safety provisions for conducting a technical exercise.it was stated that at the time of the accident the reactor was being operated with many key safety systems turned off, most notably the emergency core cooling system , lar , and az . personnel had an insufficient understanding of technical procedures involved with the nuclear reactor, and knowingly ignored regulations to expedite the electrical test completion. several procedural irregularities also helped to make the accident possible, one of which was insufficient communication between the safety officers and the operators in charge of the test.it was held that the designers of the reactor considered this combination of events to be impossible and therefore did not allow for the creation of emergency protection systems capable of preventing the combination of events that led to the crisis, namely the intentional disabling of emergency protection equipment plus the violation of operating procedures. thus the primary cause of the accident was the extremely improbable combination of rule infringement plus the operational routine allowed by the power station staff.on the disconnection of safety systems, valery legasov said in , it was like airplane pilots experimenting with the engines in flight.

in this analysis the operators were blamed, but deficiencies in the reactor design and in the operating regulations that made the accident possible were set aside and mentioned only casually. this view was reflected in numerous publications and artistic works on the theme of the chernobyl accident that appeared immediately after the accident, and for a long time remained dominant in the public consciousness and in popular publications.

the trial took place from  to  july  in a temporary courtroom set up in the house of culture in the city of chernobyl, ukraine. five plant employees ; and yuri a. laushkin  were sentenced to ten, ten, ten, five, three, and two years respectively in labor camps. the families of aleksandr akimov, leonid toptunov and valery perevozchenko had received official letters, but prosecution against the employees had been terminated at their deaths.

anatoly dyatlov was found guilty of criminal mismanagement of potentially explosive enterprises and sentenced to ten years imprisonmentof which he would serve threefor the role that his oversight of the experiment played in the ensuing accident.

in  a commission of the ussr state committee for the supervision of safety in industry and nuclear power reassessed the causes and circumstances of the chernobyl accident and came to new insights and conclusions. based on that, insag published an additional report, insag, which reviewed that part of the insag report in which primary attention is given to the reasons for the accident, and this included the text of the  ussr state commission report translated into english by the iaea as annex i.by the time of this report, the postsoviet ukrainian government had declassified a number of kgb documents from the period between  and  related to the chernobyl plant. it mentioned, for example, previous reports of structural damage caused by negligence during construction of the plant  that were never acted upon. they documented more than  emergency situations in the plant during this period, eight of which were caused by negligence or poor competence on the part of personnel.in the insag report, most of the earlier accusations against staff for breach of regulations were acknowledged to be either erroneous, being based on incorrect information obtained in august , or were judged less relevant. the insag report also reflected the view of the  ussr state commission account which held that the operators actions in turning off the emergency core cooling system, interfering with the settings on the protection equipment, and blocking the level and pressure in the separator drum did not contribute to the original cause of the accident and its magnitude, although they may have been a breach of regulations. in fact, turning off the emergency system designed to prevent the two turbine generators from stopping was not a violation of regulations. soviet authorities had identified a multitude of operator actions as regulation violations in the original  report while no such regulations were in fact in place.the primary design cause of the accident, as determined by insag, was a major deficiency in safety features, in particular the positive scram effect due to the control rods graphite tips that actually initially increased reactivity when control rods entered the core to reduce reactivity. there was also an overly positive void coefficient of the reactor, whereby steamgenerated voids in the fuel cooling channels would increase reactivity because neutron absorption was reduced, resulting in more steam generation, and thereby more voids; a regenerative process.to avoid such conditions, it was necessary for the operators to track the value of the reactor operational reactivity margin  but this value was not readily available to the operators and they were not aware of the safety significance of orm on void and power coefficients.

however, regulations did forbid operating the reactor with a small margin of reactivity. yet postaccident studies have shown that the way in which the real role of the orm is reflected in the operating procedures and design documentation for the rbmk is extremely contradictory, and furthermore, orm was not treated as an operational safety limit, violation of which could lead to an accident.even in this revised analysis, the human factor remained identified as a major factor in causing the accident; particularly the operating crews deviation from the test programme. most reprehensibly, unapproved changes in the test procedure were deliberately made on the spot, although the plant was known to be in a very different condition from that intended for the test. this included operating the reactor at a lower power level than the prescribed  mw before starting the electrical test. the  assertions of soviet experts notwithstanding, regulations did not prohibit operating the reactor at this low power level.insag also said, the poor quality of operating procedures and instructions, and their conflicting character, put a heavy burden on the operating crew, including the chief engineer. the accident can be said to have flowed from a deficient safety culture, not only at the chernobyl plant, but throughout the soviet design, operating and regulatory organizations for nuclear power that existed at that time.

the reactor had a dangerously large positive void coefficient of reactivity. the void coefficient is a measurement of how a reactor responds to increased steam formation in the water coolant. most other reactor designs have a negative coefficient, i.e. the nuclear reaction rate slows when steam bubbles form in the coolant, since as the steam voids increase, fewer neutrons are slowed down. faster neutrons are less likely to split uranium atoms, so the reactor produces less power .chernobyls rbmk reactor, however, used solid graphite as a neutron moderator to slow down the neutrons, and the cooling water acted as a neutron absorber. thus, neutrons are moderated by the graphite even if steam bubbles form in the water. furthermore, because steam absorbs neutrons much less readily than water, increasing the voids means that more moderated neutrons are able to split uranium atoms, increasing the reactors power output. this could create a positive feedback regenerative process  which makes the rbmk design very unstable at low power levels, and prone to sudden energy surges to a dangerous level. not only was this behaviour counterintuitive, this property of the reactor under certain conditions was unknown to the personnel.

there was a significant flaw in the design of the control rods.  the reactor core was  metres  high. the upper half of the rod  metres  was boron carbide, which absorbs neutrons and thereby slows the reaction. the bottom section of each control rod was a . meter graphite displacer, which prevented the channels from filling with water when rods were withdrawn. the flaw lay in the .metre  gap between the bottom of the graphite displacer and the bottom of the reactor, meaning that the lowest portion of control rod channel was filled with water and not graphite. see page . fig .  with this design, when the rods were inserted from the fully retracted position to stop the reaction on the az signal, the graphite displaced neutronabsorbing water, causing fewer neutrons to be absorbed and increasing reactivity.  for the first  to  seconds of rod deployment until the boron was in position, reactor power across the floor of the reactor could increase, rather than decrease. this feature of control rod operation was counterintuitive and not known to the reactor operators.

other deficiencies were noted in the rbmk reactor design, as were its noncompliance with accepted standards and with the requirements of nuclear reactor safety. while insag and insag reports both identified operator error as an issue of concern, the insag identified that there were numerous other issues that were contributing factors that led to the incident. these contributing factors include

the plant was not designed to safety standards in effect and incorporated unsafe features

inadequate safety analysis was performed

there was insufficient attention to independent safety review

operating procedures not founded satisfactorily in safety analysis

safety information not adequately and effectively communicated between operators, and between operators and designers

the operators did not adequately understand safety aspects of the plant

operators did not sufficiently respect formal requirements of operational and test procedures

the regulatory regime was insufficient to effectively counter pressures for production

there was a general lack of safety culture in nuclear matters at the national level as well as locally

the force of the second explosion and the ratio of xenon radioisotopes released after the accident led sergei a. pakhomov and yuri v. dubasov in  to theorize that the second explosion could have been an extremely fast nuclear power transient resulting from core material melting in the absence of its water coolant and moderator. pakhomov and dubasov argued that there was no delayed supercritical increase in power but a runaway prompt criticality which would have developed much faster. he felt the physics of this would be more similar to the explosion of a fizzled nuclear weapon, and it produced the second explosion.their evidence came from cherepovets, a city , kilometres  northeast of chernobyl, where physicists from the v.g. khlopin radium institute measured anomalous high levels of xenona short halflife isotopefour days after the explosion. this meant that a nuclear event in the reactor may have ejected xenon to higher altitudes in the atmosphere than the later fire did, allowing widespread movement of xenon to remote locations. this was an alternative to the more accepted explanation of a positivefeedback power excursion where the reactor disassembled itself by steam explosion.the energy released by the second explosion, which produced the majority of the damage, was estimated by pakhomov and dubasov to be at  billion joules, the equivalent of about  tons of tnt.pakhomov and dubasovs nuclear fizzle hypothesis was examined in  by larserik de geer, christer persson and henning rodhe, who put the hypothesized fizzle event as the more probable cause of the first explosion. both analyses argue that the nuclear fizzle event, whether producing the second or first explosion, consisted of a prompt chain reaction that was limited to a small portion of the reactor core, since selfdisassembly occurs rapidly in fizzle events.de geer, persson and rodhe commented

we believe that thermal neutron mediated nuclear explosions at the bottom of a number of fuel channels in the reactor caused a jet of debris to shoot upwards through the refuelling tubes. this jet then rammed the tubes kg plugs, continued through the roof and travelled into the atmosphere to altitudes of .km where the weather conditions provided a route to cherepovets. the steam explosion which ruptured the reactor vessel occurred some . seconds later.this second explosion was estimated by the authors to have had the power equivalent of  tons of tnt.

although it is difficult to compare releases between the chernobyl accident and a deliberate air burst nuclear detonation, it has still been estimated that about four hundred times more radioactive material was released from chernobyl than by the atomic bombing of hiroshima and nagasaki together. however, the chernobyl accident only released about one hundredth to one thousandth of the total amount of radioactivity released during nuclear weapons testing at the height of the cold war; the wide estimate being due to the different abundances of isotopes released.at chernobyl, approximately , square kilometres  of land was significantly contaminated with fallout, with the worst hit regions being in belarus, ukraine and russia. lower levels of contamination were detected over all of europe except for the iberian peninsula. most of the fallout with radioactive dust particles was released during the first ten days after the accident. by around may , a radioactive cloud had reached the netherlands and belgium.

the initial evidence that a major release of radioactive material was affecting other countries came not from soviet sources, but from sweden. on the morning of  april, workers at the forsmark nuclear power plant in central sweden  were found to have radioactive particles on their clothes, except they had this whenever they came to work rather than exiting.it was swedens elevated radioactivity level, detected at noon on  april that, having been determined as not caused by a leak at the swedish plant, first suggested a serious nuclear problem originating from the western soviet union. the evacuation of pripyat on  april had been silently completed without the disaster being declared outside the soviet union. a rise in radiation levels in the subsequent days had also been measured in finland, but a civil service strike delayed the response and publication.

contamination from the chernobyl accident was scattered irregularly depending on weather conditions, much of it deposited on mountainous regions such as the alps, the welsh mountains and the scottish highlands, where adiabatic cooling caused radioactive rainfall. the resulting patches of contamination were often highly localized, and localized waterflows contributed to large variations in radioactivity over small areas. sweden and norway also received heavy fallout when the contaminated air collided with a cold front, bringing rain., there was also groundwater contamination.

rain was deliberately seeded over , square kilometres  belarus by the soviet air force to remove radioactive particles from clouds heading toward highly populated areas. heavy, blackcoloured rain fell on the city of gomel. reports from soviet and western scientists indicate that the belarusian ssr received about  of the contamination that fell on the former soviet union. however, the  torch report stated that up to half of the volatile particles had actually landed outside the former ussr area currently making up of ukraine, belarus, and russia. an unconnected large area in russian sfsr south of bryansk was also contaminated, as were parts of northwestern ukrainian ssr. studies in surrounding countries indicate that more than one million people could have been affected by radiation. data from a longterm monitoring program  shows a decrease in internal radiation exposure of the inhabitants of a region in belarus close to gomel. resettlement may even be possible in prohibited areas provided that people comply with appropriate dietary rules.

in western europe, precautionary measures taken in response to the radiation included banning the importation of certain foods. a  study by the french society for nuclear energy found that contamination was relatively limited, diminishing from west to east, such that a hunter consuming  kilograms of contaminated wild boar in  would be exposed to about one millisievert.

the chernobyl release was characterized by the physical and chemical properties of the radioisotopes in the core. particularly dangerous were the highly radioactive fission products, those with high nuclear decay rates that accumulate in the food chain, such as some of the isotopes of iodine, caesium and strontium. iodine was and caesium remains the two most responsible for the radiation exposure received by the general population.detailed reports on the release of radioisotopes from the site were published in  and , with the latter report updated in .

at different times after the accident, different isotopes were responsible for the majority of the external dose. the remaining quantity of any radioisotope, and therefore the activity of that isotope, after  decay halflives have passed, is less than  of its initial magnitude, and it continues to reduce beyond . after  halflives to . remaining after  halflives have passed and so on. some radionuclides have decay products that are likewise radioactive, which is not accounted for here. the release of radioisotopes from the nuclear fuel was largely controlled by their boiling points, and the majority of the radioactivity present in the core was retained in the reactor.

all of the noble gases, including krypton and xenon, contained within the reactor were released immediately into the atmosphere by the first steam explosion. the atmospheric release of xenon, with a halflife of  days, is estimated at  pbq.

 to  of all core radioiodine in the reactor, about  pbq , or about . kilograms , was released, as a mixture of sublimed vapour, solid particles, and organic iodine compounds. iodine has a halflife of  days.

 to  of all core caesium was released,  pbq in all. caesium was released in aerosol form; caesium, along with isotopes of strontium, are the two primary elements preventing the chernobyl exclusion zone being reinhabited. . bq equals  kilograms of caesium. cs has a halflife of  years.

tellurium, halflife  hours, an estimated  pbq was released.

an early estimate for total nuclear fuel material released to the environment was .; this was later revised to ... this corresponds to the atmospheric emission of  tonnes  of fragmented fuel.two sizes of particles were released small particles of . to . micrometres, each an individually unrecognizable small dust or smog sized particulate matter and larger settling dust sized particles that therefore were quicker to fallout of the air, of  micrometres in diameter. these larger particles contained about  to  of the released high boiling point or nonvolatile radioisotopes; zirconium, niobium, lanthanum, cerium and the transuranic elements, including neptunium, plutonium and the minor actinides, embedded in a uranium oxide matrix.

the dose that was calculated is the relative external gamma dose rate for a person standing in the open. the exact dose to a person in the real world who would spend most of their time sleeping indoors in a shelter and then venturing out to consume an internal dose from the inhalation or ingestion of a radioisotope, requires a personnel specific radiation dose reconstruction analysis and whole body count exams, of which , were conducted in ukraine by soviet medical personnel in .

the chernobyl nuclear power plant is located next to the pripyat river, which feeds into the dnieper reservoir system, one of the largest surface water systems in europe, which at the time supplied water to kievs . million residents, and was still in spring flood when the accident occurred. the radioactive contamination of aquatic systems therefore became a major problem in the immediate aftermath of the accident.in the most affected areas of ukraine, levels of radioactivity  in drinking water caused concern during the weeks and months after the accident. guidelines for levels of radioiodine in drinking water were temporarily raised to , bq/l, allowing most water to be reported as safe. officially it was stated that all contaminants had settled to the bottom in an insoluble phase and would not dissolve for  years.

a year after the accident it was announced that even the water of the chernobyl plants cooling pond was within acceptable norms. despite this, two months after the disaster the kiev water supply was switched from the dnieper to the desna river. meanwhile, massive silt traps were constructed, along with an enormous metre  deep underground barrier to prevent groundwater from the destroyed reactor entering the pripyat river.groundwater was not badly affected by the chernobyl accident since radionuclides with short halflives decayed away long before they could affect groundwater supplies, and longerlived radionuclides such as radiocaesium and radiostrontium were adsorbed to surface soils before they could transfer to groundwater. however, significant transfers of radionuclides to groundwater have occurred from waste disposal sites in the  km  exclusion zone around chernobyl. although there is a potential for transfer of radionuclides from these disposal sites offsite , the iaea chernobyl report argues that this is not significant in comparison to current levels of washout of surfacedeposited radioactivity.

 bioaccumulation of radioactivity in fish resulted in concentrations  that in many cases were significantly above guideline maximum levels for consumption. guideline maximum levels for radiocaesium in fish vary from country to country but are approximately  bq/kg in the european union. in the kiev reservoir in ukraine, concentrations in fish were in the range of  bq/kg during the first few years after the accident.in small closed lakes in belarus and the bryansk region of russia, concentrations in a number of fish species varied from  to , bq/kg during the period . the contamination of fish caused shortterm concern in parts of the uk and germany and in the long term  in the affected areas of ukraine, belarus, and russia as well as in parts of scandinavia.chernobyls radiocaesium deposits were used to calibrate sedimentation samples from lake qattinah, arabic   in syria. the cs provides a sharp, maximal, data point in radioactivity of the core sample at the  depth, and acts as a date check on the depth of the pb in the core sample.

after the disaster, four square kilometres  of pine forest directly downwind of the reactor turned reddishbrown and died, earning the name of the red forest. some animals in the worsthit areas also died or stopped reproducing. most domestic animals were removed from the exclusion zone, but horses left on an island in the pripyat river  km  from the power plant died when their thyroid glands were destroyed by radiation doses of  sv. some cattle on the same island died and those that survived were stunted because of thyroid damage. the next generation appeared to be normal. the mutation rates for plants and animals have increased by a factor of  because of the release of radionuclides from chernobyl. there is evidence for elevated mortality rates and increased rates of reproductive failure in contaminated areas, consistent with the expected frequency of deaths due to mutations.on farms in narodychi raion of ukraine it is claimed that from  to  nearly  animals were born with gross deformities such as missing or extra limbs, missing eyes, heads or ribs, or deformed skulls; in comparison, only three abnormal births had been registered in the five years prior.subsequent research on microorganisms, while limited, suggests that in the aftermath of the disaster, bacterial and viral specimens exposed to the radiation  underwent rapid changes. activations of soil micromycetes have been reported. it is currently unclear how these changes in species with rapid reproductive turnover  will manifest in terms of virulence, drug resistance, immune evasion, and so on; a paper in  reported the discovery of an escherichia coli mutant that was hyperresistant to a variety of dnadamaging elements, including xray radiation, uvc, and nitroquinoline oxide . cladosporium sphaerospermum, a species of fungus that has thrived in the chernobyl contaminated area, has been investigated for the purpose of using the fungus particular melanin to protect against highradiation environments, such as space travel. the disaster has been described by lawyers, academics and journalists as an example of ecocide.

with radiocaesium binding less with humic acid, peaty soils than the known binding fixation that occurs on kaolinite rich clay soils, many marshy areas of ukraine had the highest soil to dairymilk transfer coefficients, of soil activity in   kbq/m to dairy milk activity in bq/l, that had ever been reported, with the transfer, from initial land activity into milk activity, ranging from . to  times that which was on the soil, a variance depending on the natural acidityconditioning of the pasture.in , soviet medical teams conducted some , wholebody count examinations on inhabitants in otherwise comparatively lightly contaminated regions with good prospects for recovery. this was to determine the effect of banning local food and using only food imports on the internal body burden of radionuclides in inhabitants. concurrent agricultural countermeasures were used when cultivation did occur, to further reduce the soil to human transfer as much as possible. the expected highest body activity was in the first few years, where the unabated ingestion of local food, primarily milk consumption, resulted in the transfer of activity from soil to body; after the dissolution of the ussr, the nowreduced scale initiative to monitor the human body activity in these regions of ukraine, recorded a small and gradual halfdecadallong rise, in internal committed dose, before returning to the previous trend of observing ever lower body counts each year.this momentary rise is hypothesized to be due to the cessation of the soviet food imports together with many villagers returning to older dairy food cultivation practices and large increases in wild berry and mushroom foraging, the latter of which have similar peaty soil to fruiting body, radiocaesium transfer coefficients.

in a  paper, a robot sent into the reactor itself returned with samples of black, melaninrich radiotrophic fungi that grow on the reactors walls.of the , wild boar killed in the  hunting season in germany, approximately one thousand were contaminated with levels of radiation above the permitted limit of  becquerels of caesium per kilogram, of dry weight, due to residual radioactivity from chernobyl. while all animal meat contains a natural level of potassium at a similar level of activity, with both wild and farm animals in italy containing    becquerels kg dw of that naturally occurring gamma emitter.because elaphomyces fungal species bioaccumulate radiocaesium, boars of the bavarian forest that consume these deer truffles are contaminated at higher levels than their environments soil. given that nuclear weapons release a higher c/c ratio than nuclear reactors, the high c content in these boars suggests that their radiological contamination can be largely attributed to the soviet unions nuclear weapons testing in ukraine, which peaked during the late s and early s.in , longterm empirical data showed no evidence of a negative influence of radiation on mammal abundance.

on high ground, such as mountain ranges, there is increased precipitation due to adiabatic cooling. this resulted in localized concentrations of contaminants on distant areas; higher in bq/m values to many lowland areas much closer to the source of the plume. this effect occurred on high ground in norway and the uk.

the norwegian agricultural authority reported that in  a total of , livestock in norway required uncontaminated feed for a period before slaughter, to ensure that their meat had an activity below the government permitted value of caesium per kilogram deemed suitable for human consumption. this contamination was due to residual radioactivity from chernobyl in the mountain plants they graze on in the wild during the summer. , sheep required uncontaminated feed for a time before slaughter during , with these sheep located in only  of norways municipalities, a decrease from the  municipalities in  and the  municipalities affected during .

the aftereffects of chernobyl on the mountain lamb industry in norway were expected to be seen for a further  years, although the severity of the effects would decline over that period. scientists report this is due to radioactive caesium isotopes being taken up by fungi such as cortinarius caperatus which is in turn eaten by sheep while grazing.

the united kingdom restricted the movement of sheep from upland areas when radioactive caesium fell across parts of northern ireland, wales, scotland, and northern england. in the immediate aftermath of the disaster in , the movement of a total of ,, sheep was restricted across a total of , farms, to prevent contaminated meat entering the human food chain. the number of sheep and the number of farms affected has decreased since . northern ireland was released from all restrictions in , and by ,  farms containing around , sheep remained under the restrictions in wales, cumbria, and northern scotland. the restrictions applying in scotland were lifted in , while those applying to wales and cumbria were lifted during , meaning no farms in the uk remain restricted because of chernobyl fallout.the legislation used to control sheep movement and compensate farmers  was revoked during october and november , by the relevant authorities in the uk. had restrictions in the uk not occurred, a heavy consumer of lamb meat would likely have received a dose of . msv over a lifetime.

the only known, causal deaths from the accident involved workers in the plant and firefighters. the reactor explosion killed two engineers and severely burned two others who were among the  workers hospitalized in the immediate aftermath. of the hospitalized workers,  exhibited symptoms of acute radiation syndrome, including one disputed case.  of the hospitalized workers died within the following three months, all of whom were hospitalized for ars and  were among the  patients hospitalized for burns. among the fatalities in the acute phase , all but one patient  were hospitalized for grade  or  ars. fifteen out of  patients with grade  ars survived. only one patient out of  with grade  ars survived.some sources report a total initial fatality of , which includes one additional death caused by coronary thrombosis attributed to stress or coincidence, but this occurred offsite.there were a number of fishermen on the reservoir a halfkilometer from the reactor to the east. of these, two shore fishermen, protosov and pustavoit, are said to have sustained doses estimated at  roentgens and vomited, but survived. the vast majority of pripyat residents slept through the distant sound of the explosion, including station engineer breus, who only became aware at am, the beginning of his next work shift. he was later taken to hospital and, while there, made the acquaintance of one teen who had ventured out alone by bicycle to watch the roof fires during the night, stopping for a time and viewing the scene at the bridge of death .n .e / .; . . contrary to this sensationalist label, the youthful night biker was treated and released from hospital, remaining in touch with breus as of .most serious cases of ars were treated with the assistance of american specialist robert peter gale, who documented a first of its kind treatment and supervized a number of bone marrow transplant procedures which were not successful. in , gale wrote a letter to correct the popularized, though egregious, portrayal of his patients as dangerous to visitors. all those who died were station operators and firefighters, over half of which from the continued wearing of dusty soaked uniforms, causing beta burns to cover large areas of skin. in the first few minutes to days,  the betatogamma energy ratio is some . owing to the large area of burned skin and sensitivity of the gi tract, bacterial infection was and remains the overarching concern to those affected with ars, as a leading cause of death, quarantine from the outside environment is a part of the normal treatment protocol. many of the surviving firefighters, continue to have skin that is atrophied, spider veined with underlying fibrosis due to experiencing extensive beta burns.

in the  years following the accident,  more people who had been initially hospitalized  died of various causes mostly unrelated to radiation exposure. only two of these deaths were the result of myelodysplastic syndrome. scientific consensus, in the form of the chernobyl forum, suggests that, although unexpected, there has been no statistically significant increase in the incidence rate of solid cancers among rescue workers. followup studies have also found this to be the case, with apparent increases in thyroid cancer simply attributed to more meticulous cancer screening for rescue workers.childhood thyroid cancer is an exception, with approximately , new incidents in the general population by  within contaminated regions of belarus, russia, and ukraine, most of which are attributed to high environmental levels of radioactive iodine shortly after the accident. the recovery rate is , with only  terminal cases  at the time of the report. there has been no increase in mutation rate among the children of the liquidators or general population living in the contaminated areas.from this same report is also a commonly cited estimate for potential future cancer fatalities in the form of an increase in cancer mortality  which speculated that, at worst, , additional cancerrelated fatalities were to be expected. although it is reasonable and forwardthinking to assume that an increase in mortality has occurred among the affected population, studies have yet to confirm such an increase with meaningful statistical certainty.  

psychosomatic illness and posttraumatic stress, resulting from widespread fear of radiological disease, is a much greater issue impacting many more people with lethal health effects, especially as it receives relatively little attention from the general public. people who believe they or others have been impacted by radiological illness, erroneous or otherwise, exhibit greater issues with feelings of no control or fatalistic/pessimistic outlooks, leading to harmful behaviors, such as a lack of initiative to treat diseases. such fears are further strengthened by poor public understanding of the effects of radiation.whether the area was publicly announced as a contaminated area is a better predictor of general health than the contamination itself. resettlement status is an even stronger predictor the residents of contaminated regions who were evacuated and resettled into uncontaminated regions can be compared with the residents who remained in the contaminated regions. resettled citizens erroneously believed they had an illness related to radiation exposure more often than citizens who remained in the contaminated regions. this brings into question the effectiveness of resettlement.such psychological distresses can also significantly increase cancer mortality rates, possibly as much as , nearly double, resulting in as many as , additional cancer mortalities among the liquidators. from this accident, the fear of radiological illness has been more of a detriment, and potentially more lethal, upon the lives of affected people than the illnesses themselves and, unlike radioactive contaminants, shows no signs of diminishing in the near future.by , the number of ukrainians claiming to be radiation sufferers  and receiving state benefits had jumped to . million, or  of the population. many of these are populations resettled from contaminated zones or former or current chernobyl plant workers. there was and remains a motivated push to achieve sufferer status as it gives access to state benefits and medical services that would otherwise not be made available. the apparent increases of ill health in this large group result partly from increased medical vigilance following the accident; many benign cases that would previously have gone unnoticed and untreated  are now being registered.of all , belarusian emergency workers, by the mids their government reported that only   died. in contrast, in the much larger work force from ukraine, numbered in the hundreds of thousands, some , casualties from a host of nonaccident causes, were reported among ukrainian cleanup workers up to the year , by the national committee for radiation protection of the ukrainian population.in september , the iaea held an advisory group meeting at the curie institute in paris on the medical handling of the skin lesions relating to the acute deaths.

the four most harmful radionuclides spread from chernobyl were iodine, caesium, caesium and strontium, with halflives of . days, . years, . years and . years respectively. the iodine was initially viewed with less alarm than the other isotopes, because of its short halflife, but it is highly volatile and now appears to have travelled furthest and caused the most severe health problems. strontium is the least volatile of the four and is of main concern in the areas near chernobyl itself.iodine tends to become concentrated in thyroid and milk glands, leading, among other things, to increased incidence of thyroid cancers. the total ingested dose was largely from iodine and, unlike the other fission products, rapidly found its way from dairy farms to human ingestion. similarly in dose reconstruction, for those evacuated at different times and from various towns, the inhalation dose was dominated by iodine , along with airborne tellurium  and oxides of rubidium  both as equally secondary, appreciable contributors.long term hazards such as caesium tends to accumulate in vital organs such as the heart, while strontium accumulates in bones and may thus be a risk to bonemarrow and lymphocytes. radiation is most damaging to cells that are actively dividing. in adult mammals cell division is slow, except in hair follicles, skin, bone marrow and the gastrointestinal tract, which is why vomiting and hair loss are common symptoms of acute radiation sickness.

the two primary individuals involved with the attempt to suggest that the mutation rate among animals was, and continues to be, higher in the chernobyl zone, are the anders moller and timothy mousseau group. apart from continuing to publish experimentally unrepeatable and discredited papers, mousseau routinely gives talks at the helen caldicott organized symposiums for physicians for social responsibility, an antinuclear advocacy group devoted to bring about a nuclear free planet. in years past, moller was previously caught and reprimanded for publishing papers that crossed the scientific misconduct/fraud line. the duo have more recently attempted to publish metaanalyses, in which the primary references they weighup, analyse and draw their conclusions from is their own prior papers along with the discredited book chernobyl consequences of the catastrophe for people and the environment.

in , geneticist colleagues ronald chesser and robert baker published a paper on the thriving vole population within the exclusion zone, in which the central conclusion of their work was essentially that the mutation rate in these animals is hundreds and probably thousands of times greater than normal. this claim occurred after they had done a comparison of the mitochondrial dna of the chernobyl voles with that of a control group of voles from outside the region. the paper appeared on the front cover of the journal nature. not long after publication, the authors discovered they had incorrectly classified the species of vole and therefore were genetically comparing two entirely different vole species. they issued a retraction in .

following the accident, journalists mistrusted many medical professionals , and in turn encouraged the public to mistrust them. throughout the european continent, due to this mediadriven framing of the contamination, many requests for induced abortions of otherwise normal pregnancies were obtained out of fears of radiation from chernobyl.

worldwide, an estimated excess of about , elective abortions may have been performed on otherwise healthy pregnancies out of fears of radiation from chernobyl, according to robert baker and ultimately a  article published by linda e. ketchum in the journal of nuclear medicine which mentions but does not reference an iaea source on the matter.the available statistical data excludes the sovietukrainebelarus abortion rates, as they are presently unavailable. from the available data, an increase in the number of abortions in what were healthy developing human offspring in denmark occurred in the months following the accident, at a rate of about  cases. in italy, a slightly above the expected number of induced abortions occurred, approximately .  in greece, following the accident, many obstetricians were unable to resist requests from worried pregnant mothers over fears of radiation. although it was determined that the effective dose to greeks would not exceed one msv , a dose much lower than that which it was determined would induce embryonic abnormalities or other nonstochastic effects, there was an observed , increase of otherwise wanted pregnancies being terminated.no evidence of changes in the prevalence of human deformities/birth congenital anomalies that might be associated with the accident are apparent in belarus or ukraine, the two republics that had the highest exposure to fallout. in sweden and in finland where no increase in abortion rates occurred, it was likewise determined that no association between the temporal and spatial variations in radioactivity and variable incidence of congenital malformations was found. a similar null increase in the abortion rate and a healthy baseline situation of no increase in birth defects was determined by assessing the hungarian congenital abnormality registry. findings were also mirrored in austria.larger mainly western european data sets, approaching a million births in the eurocat database, divided into exposed and control groups were assessed in . as no chernobyl impacts were detected, the researchers conclude in retrospect, the widespread fear in the population about the possible effects of exposure on the unborn fetus was not justified. despite studies from germany and turkey, the only robust evidence of negative pregnancy outcomes that transpired after the accident were these elective abortion indirect effects, in greece, denmark, italy etc., due to the anxieties that were created.in very high doses, it was known at the time that radiation could cause a physiological increase in the rate of pregnancy anomalies, but unlike the dominant linear nothreshold model of radiation and cancer rate increases, it was known, by researchers familiar with both the prior human exposure data and animal testing, that the malformation of organs appears to be a deterministic effect with a threshold dose below which, no rate increase is observed. this teratology  issue was discussed by frank castronovo of the harvard medical school in , publishing a detailed review of dose reconstructions and the available pregnancy data following the chernobyl accident, inclusive of data from kievs two largest obstetrics hospitals.castronovo concludes that the lay press with newspaper reporters playing up anecdotal stories of children with birth defects is, together with dubious studies that show selection bias, the two primary factors causing the persistent belief that chernobyl increased the background rate of birth defects. when the vast amount of pregnancy data does not support this perception as no women took part in the most radioactive liquidator operations, no inutero individuals would have been expected to have received a threshold dose.studies of low statistical significance on some of the most contaminated and proximal regions of ukraine and belarus, tentatively argue with some  children who were irradiated by the accident in utero during weeks  to  of gestation had an increased rate of intellectual disability, lower verbal iq, and possibly other negative effects. these findings may be due to confounding factors or annual variations in random chance.the chernobyl liquidators, essentially an allmale civil defense emergency workforce, would go on to father normal children, without an increase in developmental anomalies or a statistically significant increase in the frequencies of germline mutations in their progeny. this normality is similarly seen in the children of the survivors of the goinia accident.a  study based on wholegenome sequencing of children of parents employed as liquidators indicated no transgenerational genetic effects of exposure of parents to ionizing radiation.

a report by the international atomic energy agency examines the environmental consequences of the accident. the united nations scientific committee on the effects of atomic radiation has estimated a global collective dose of radiation exposure from the accident equivalent on average to  additional days of world exposure to natural background radiation; individual doses were far higher than the global mean among those most exposed, including , primarily male recovery workers  who averaged an effective dose equivalent to an extra  years of typical natural background radiation exposure each.estimates of the number of deaths that will eventually result from the accident vary enormously; disparities reflect both the lack of solid scientific data and the different methodologies used to quantify mortalitywhether the discussion is confined to specific geographical areas or extends worldwide, and whether the deaths are immediate, short term, or long term. in , thirtyone deaths were directly attributed to the accident, all among the reactor staff and emergency workers.the chernobyl forum predicts that the eventual death toll could reach , among those exposed to the highest levels of radiation ; this figure is a total causal death toll prediction, combining the deaths of approximately  emergency workers who died soon after the accident from acute radiation syndrome,  children who have died of thyroid cancer and a future predicted total of , deaths from radiationinduced cancer and leukaemia.in a peerreviewed paper in the international journal of cancer in , the authors expanded the discussion on those exposed to all of europe  they stated, without entering into a discussion on deaths, that in terms of total excess cancers attributed to the accident

the risk projections suggest that by now  chernobyl may have caused about  cases of thyroid cancer and  cases of other cancers in europe, representing about . of all incident cancers since the accident. models predict that by  about , cases of thyroid cancer and , cases of other cancers may be expected due to radiation from the accident, whereas several hundred million cancer cases are expected from other causes.

two antinuclear advocacy groups have publicized nonpeerreviewed estimates that include mortality estimates for those who were exposed to even smaller amounts of radiation. the union of concerned scientists  calculated that, among the hundreds of millions of people exposed worldwide, there will be an eventual , excess cancer cases, resulting in , excess cancer deaths, excluding thyroid cancer. however, these calculations are based on a simple linear nothreshold model multiplication and the misapplication of the collective dose, which the international commission on radiological protection  states should not be done as using the collective dose is inappropriate to use in risk projections.along similar lines to the ucs approach, the  torch report, commissioned by the european greens political party, likewise simplistically calculates an eventual , to , excess cancer deaths in total, around the globe.

yet the death rate from thyroid cancer has remained the same as prior to the technology. for these and other reasons, it is suggested that no reliable increase has been detected in the environs of chernobyl, that cannot otherwise be explained as an artifact of the globally well documented screening effect.

in , the un collaborative, chernobyl forum, revealed thyroid cancer among children to be one of the main health impacts from the chernobyl accident. this is due to the ingestion of contaminated dairy products, along with the inhalation of the shortlived, highly radioactive isotope, iodine. in that publication, more than , cases of childhood thyroid cancer were reported. it is important to note that there was no evidence of an increase in solid cancers or leukemia. it said that there was an increase in psychological problems among the affected population. the whos radiation program reported that the , cases of thyroid cancer resulted in nine deaths.according to the united nations scientific committee on the effects of atomic radiation, up to the year , an excess of more than , cases of thyroid cancer had been reported. that is, over the estimated preaccident baseline thyroid cancer rate, more than , casual cases of thyroid cancer have been reported in children and adolescents exposed at the time of the accident, a number that is expected to increase. they concluded that there is no other evidence of major health impacts from the radiation exposure.welldifferentiated thyroid cancers are generally treatable, and when treated the fiveyear survival rate of thyroid cancer is , and  after  years. the united nations scientific committee on the effects of atomic radiation had reported  deaths from thyroid cancer in . the international atomic energy agency  also states that there has been no increase in the rate of birth defects or abnormalities, or solid cancerssuch as lung cancercorroborating the assessments by the un committee. unscear raised the possibility of long term genetic defects, pointing to a doubling of radiationinduced minisatellite mutations among children born in . however, the risk of thyroid cancer associated with the chernobyl accident is still high according to published studies.the german affiliate of the antinuclear energy organization, the international physicians for the prevention of nuclear war suggest that , people are affected by thyroid cancer as of , and that , cases are expected in the future.

fred mettler, a radiation expert at the university of new mexico, puts the number of worldwide cancer deaths outside the highly contaminated zone at perhaps ,, for a total of , chernobylassociated fatal cancers, saying the number is small  relative to the normal spontaneous risk of cancer, but the numbers are large in absolute terms. the same report outlined studies based on data found in the russian registry from  to  that suggested that of , russian workers exposed to an average dose of  msv about five percent of all fatalities that occurred may have been due to radiation exposure.the report went into depth about the risks to mental health of exaggerated fears about the effects of radiation. according to the iaea the designation of the affected population as victims rather than survivors has led them to perceive themselves as helpless, weak and lacking control over their future. the iaea says that this may have led to behaviour that has caused further health effects.fred mettler commented that  years later the population remains largely unsure of what the effects of radiation actually are and retain a sense of foreboding. a number of adolescents and young adults who have been exposed to modest or small amounts of radiation feel that they are somehow fatally flawed and there is no downside to using illicit drugs or having unprotected sex. to reverse such attitudes and behaviours will likely take years, although some youth groups have begun programs that have promise. in addition, disadvantaged children around chernobyl experience health problems that are attributable not only to the chernobyl accident, but also to the poor state of postsoviet health systems.the united nations scientific committee on the effects of atomic radiation , part of the chernobyl forum, have produced their own assessments of the radiation effects. unscear was set up as a collaboration between various united nation bodies, including the world health organization, after the atomic bomb attacks on hiroshima and nagasaki, to assess the longterm effects of radiation on human health.

the number of potential deaths arising from the chernobyl disaster is heavily debated. the world health organizations prediction of , future cancer deaths in surrounding countries is based on the linear nothreshold model , which assumes that the damage inflicted by radiation at low doses is directly proportional to the dose. radiation epidemiologist roy shore contends that estimating health effects in a population from the lnt model is not wise because of the uncertainties.according to the union of concerned scientists the number of excess cancer deaths worldwide  is approximately , based on the same lnt.another study critical of the chernobyl forum report was commissioned by greenpeace, which asserted that the most recently published figures indicate that in belarus, russia and ukraine the accident could have resulted in ,, additional deaths in the period between  and . the scientific secretary of the chernobyl forum criticized the reports reliance on nonpeerreviewed locally produced studies. although most of the studys sources were from peerreviewed journals, including many western medical journals, the higher mortality estimates were from nonpeerreviewed sources, while gregory hrtl  suggested that the conclusions were motivated by ideology.chernobyl consequences of the catastrophe for people and the environment is a  russian publication that concludes that there were , premature deaths as a consequence of the radioactivity released. the results were criticized by m. i. balonov from the institute of radiation hygiene in st. petersburg, who described them as biased, drawing from sources that were difficult to independently verify and lacking a proper scientific base. balanov expressed his opinion that the authors unfortunately did not appropriately analyse the content of the russianlanguage publications, for example, to separate them into those that contain scientific evidence and those based on hasty impressions and ignorant conclusions.according to u.s. nuclear regulatory commission member and professor of health physics kenneth mossman, the lnt philosophy is overly conservative, and lowlevel radiation may be less dangerous than commonly believed. yoshihisa matsumoto, a radiation biologist at the tokyo institute of technology, cites laboratory experiments on animals to suggest there must be a threshold dose below which dna repair mechanisms can completely repair any radiation damage. mossman suggests that the proponents of the current model believe that being conservative is justified due to the uncertainties surrounding low level doses and it is better to have a prudent public health policy.another significant issue is establishing consistent data on which to base the analysis of the impact of the chernobyl accident. since , large social and political changes have occurred within the affected regions and these changes have had significant impact on the administration of health care, on socioeconomic stability, and the manner in which statistical data is collected. ronald chesser, a radiation biologist at texas tech university, says that the subsequent soviet collapse, scarce funding, imprecise dosimetry, and difficulties tracking people over the years have limited the number of studies and their reliability.

it is difficult to establish the total economic cost of the disaster. according to mikhail gorbachev, the soviet union spent  billion rbls  on containment and decontamination, virtually bankrupting itself. in , the total cost over  years for belarus which includes the monthly payments to liquidators, was estimated at us billion; about  billion in todays dollars given inflation rates. gorbachev in april  wrote the nuclear meltdown at chernobyl  years ago this month, even more than my launch of perestroika, was perhaps the real cause of the collapse of the soviet union.ongoing costs are well known; in their  report, the chernobyl forum stated that between five and seven percent of government spending in ukraine is still related to chernobyl, while in belarus more than  billion is thought to have been spent between  and , with  of national budget having been chernobylrelated in , falling to six percent by . in , ukraine spent five to seven percent of its national budget on recovery activities related to the chernobyl disaster. overall economic loss is estimated at  billion in belarus. much of the current cost relates to the payment of chernobylrelated social benefits to some seven million people across the three countries.a significant economic impact at the time was the removal of , ha  of agricultural land and , ha  of forest from production. while much of this has been returned to use, agricultural production costs have risen due to the need for special cultivation techniques, fertilizers and additives. politically, the accident gave great significance to the new soviet policy of glasnost, and helped forge closer sovietus relations at the end of the cold war, through bioscientific cooperation. the disaster also became a key factor in the dissolution of the soviet union in , and a major influence in shaping the new eastern europe.both ukraine and belarus, in their first months of independence, lowered legal radiation thresholds from the soviet unions previous, elevated thresholds .,ukrainians viewed the chernobyl disaster as another attempt by russians to destroy them, comparable to the holodomor. meanwhile, commentators have argued that the events of the chernobyl disaster were uniquely inclined to occur in a communist country versus a capitalist country. it has been argued that soviet power plant administrators were not empowered to make crucial decisions when time was of the essence.mikhail gorbachev, the final leader of the soviet union, stated in respect to the chernobyl disaster that, more than anything else,  opened the possibility of much greater freedom of expression, to the point that the  system as we knew it could no longer continue.a famous austrian alpine farmer sepp holzer reported decades later that the chernobyl disaster had ruined his business selling edible mushrooms  despite the fact that our mushrooms were obviously not contaminated, overnight it became impossible to sell them.

following the accident, questions arose about the future of the plant and its eventual fate. all work on the unfinished reactors no.  and no.  was halted three years later. however, the trouble at the chernobyl plant did not end with the disaster in reactor no. . the damaged reactor was sealed off and  cubic meters  of concrete was placed between the disaster site and the operational buildings. the work was managed by grigoriy mihaylovich naginskiy, the deputy chief engineer of installation and construction directorate  . the ukrainian government allowed the three remaining reactors to continue operating because of an energy shortage in the country.

in october , a fire broke out in the turbine building of reactor no. ; the authorities subsequently declared the reactor damaged beyond repair, and it was taken offline. reactor no.  was decommissioned in november  as part of a deal between the ukrainian government and international organizations such as the iaea to end operations at the plant. on  december , thenpresident leonid kuchma personally turned off reactor no.  in an official ceremony, shutting down the entire site.

soon after the accident, the reactor building was quickly encased by a mammoth concrete sarcophagus in a notable feat of construction under severe conditions. crane operators worked blindly from inside leadlined cabins taking instructions from distant radio observers, while gargantuansized pieces of concrete were moved to the site on custommade vehicles. the purpose of the sarcophagus was to stop any further release of radioactive particles into the atmosphere, isolate the exposed core from the weather and provide safety for the continued operations of adjacent reactors one through three.the concrete sarcophagus was never intended to last very long, with a lifespan of only  years. on  february , a  m  section of the roof of the turbinebuilding collapsed, adjacent to the sarcophagus, causing a new release of radioactivity and temporary evacuation of the area. at first it was assumed that the roof collapsed because of the weight of snow, however the amount of snow was not exceptional, and the report of a ukrainian factfinding panel concluded that the collapse was the result of sloppy repair work and aging of the structure. experts warned the sarcophagus itself was on the verge of collapse.in , the international chernobyl shelter fund was founded to design and build a more permanent cover for the unstable and shortlived sarcophagus. it received  million from international donors in  and was managed by the european bank for reconstruction and development . the new shelter was named the new safe confinement and construction began in . it is a metal arch  metres  high and spanning  metres  built on rails adjacent to the reactor no.  building so that it could be slid over the top of the existing sarcophagus. the new safe confinement was completed in  and slid into place over top the sarcophagus on  november. the huge steel arch was moved into place over several weeks. unlike the original sarcophagus, the new safe confinement is designed to allow the reactor to be safely dismantled using remotely operated equipment.

used fuel from units  was stored in the units cooling ponds, and in an interim spent fuel storage facility pond, isf, which now holds most of the spent fuel from units , allowing those reactors to be decommissioned under less restrictive conditions. approximately  of the fuel assemblies from units  and  were damaged and required special handling. moving fuel to isf was thus carried out in three stages fuel from unit  was moved first, then all undamaged fuel from units  and , and finally the damaged fuel from units  and . fuel transfers to isf were completed in june .a need for larger, longerterm radioactive waste management at the chernobyl site is to be fulfilled by a new facility designated isf. this facility is to serve as dry storage for used fuel assemblies from units  and other operational wastes, as well as material from decommissioning units  .a contract was signed in  with areva np  for construction of isf. in , after a significant part of the storage structures had been built, technical deficiencies in the design concept became apparent. in , areva withdrew and holtec international was contracted for a new design and construction of isf. the new design was approved in , work started in , and construction was completed in august .isf is the worlds largest nuclear fuel storage facility, expected to hold more than , fuel assemblies for at least  years. the project includes a processing facility able to cut the rbmk fuel assemblies and to place the material in canisters, to be filled with inert gas and welded shut. the canisters are then to be transported to dry storage vaults, where the fuel containers will be enclosed for up to  years. expected processing capacity is , fuel assemblies per year.

according to official estimates, about  of the fuel in reactor no.  at the time of the accident  remains inside the shelter, with a total radioactivity of nearly  million curies . the radioactive material consists of core fragments, dust, and lavalike fuel containing materials also called coriumthat flowed through the wrecked reactor building before hardening into a ceramic form.

three different lavas are present in the basement of the reactor building black, brown, and a porous ceramic. the lava materials are silicate glasses with inclusions of other materials within them. the porous lava is brown lava that dropped into water and thus cooled rapidly. it is unclear how long the ceramic form will retard the release of radioactivity. from  to , a series of published papers suggested that the selfirradiation of the lava would convert all , tonnes  into a submicrometre and mobile powder within a few weeks.it has been reported that the degradation of the lava is likely to be a slow, gradual process, rather than sudden and rapid. the same paper states that the loss of uranium from the wrecked reactor is only  kg  per year; this low rate of uranium leaching suggests that the lava is resisting its environment. the paper also states that when the shelter is improved, the leaching rate of the lava will decrease. as of , some fuel had already degraded significantly. the famous elephants foot, which originally was so hard that it required the use of an armor piercing ak round to remove a chunk, had softened to a texture similar to sand.prior to the completion of the new safe confinement building, rainwater acted as a neutron moderator, triggering increased fission in the remaining materials, risking criticality. gadolinium nitrate solution was used to quench neutrons to slow the fission. even after completion of the building, fission reactions may be increasing; scientists are working to understand the cause and risks. while neutron activity has declined across most of the destroyed fuel, from  until late  a doubling in neutron density was recorded in the subreactor space, before levelling off in early . this indicated increasing levels of fission as water levels dropped, the opposite of what had been expected, and atypical compared to other fuelcontaining areas. the fluctuations have led to fears that a selfsustaining reaction could be created, which would likely spread more radioactive dust and debris throughout the new safe confinement, making future cleanup even more difficult. potential solutions include using a robot to drill into the fuel and insert boron carbide control rods. in early , a chnpp press release stated that the observed increase in neutron densities had leveled off since the beginning of that year.

the exclusion zone was originally an area with a radius of  kilometres  in all directions from the plant, but was subsequently greatly enlarged to include an area measuring approximately , km , officially called the zone of alienation. the area has largely reverted to forest and was overrun by wildlife due to the lack of human competition for space and resources.some sources have estimated when the site could be considered habitable again

 years or less 

, years 

, years or more 

tens of thousands of years in the years following the disaster, residents known as samosely illegally returned to their abandoned homes to regain their lives. most people are retired and survive mainly from farming and packages delivered by visitors. as of ,  locals had returned to the zone and were living permanently there.in , ukraine opened up the sealed zone around the chernobyl reactor to tourists wishing to learn more about the  tragedy. sergii mirnyi, a radiation reconnaissance officer at the time of the accident, and now an academic at national university of kyivmohyla academy, has written about the psychological and physical effects on survivors and visitors, and worked as an advisor to chernobyl tourism groups.

during the dry season, forest fires are a perennial concern in areas contaminated by radioactive material. dry conditions and buildup of debris make the forests a ripe breeding ground for wildfires. depending on prevailing atmospheric conditions, smoke from wildfires could potentially spread more radioactive material outside the exclusion zone. in belarus, the bellesrad organization is tasked with overseeing food cultivation and forestry management in the area.

in april , forest fires spread through , hectares  of the exclusion zone, causing increased radiation from the release of caesium and strontium from the ground and biomass. the increase in radioactivity was detectable by the monitoring network but did not pose a threat to human health. the average radiation dose that kyiv residents received as a result of the fires was estimated to be  nsv.

the chernobyl trust fund was created in  by the united nations to help victims of the chernobyl accident. it is administered by the united nations office for the coordination of humanitarian affairs, which also manages strategy formulation, resource mobilization, and advocacy efforts. beginning in , under the united nations development programme, the fund shifted its focus from emergency assistance to longterm development.the chernobyl shelter fund was established in  at the g summit in denver to finance the shelter implementation plan . the plan called for transforming the site into an ecologically safe condition through stabilization of the sarcophagus and construction of a new safe confinement  structure. while the original cost estimate for the sip was us million, the  estimate was . billion. the sip is being managed by a consortium of bechtel, battelle, and lectricit de france, and conceptual design for the nsc consisted of a movable arch, constructed away from the shelter to avoid high radiation, then slid over the sarcophagus. the nsc was moved into position in november  and was expected to be completed by late .in , the united nations development programme launched the chernobyl recovery and development programme  for the recovery of affected areas. the programme was initiated in february  based on the recommendations in the report on human consequences of the chernobyl nuclear accident. the main goal of the crdp was supporting the government of ukraine in mitigating longterm social, economic, and ecological consequences of the chernobyl catastrophe. crdp works in the four most affected ukrainian areas kyivska, zhytomyrska, chernihivska and rivnenska.

more than , ukrainian children affected by the disaster have been treated in the resort town of tarar, cuba since .the international project on the health effects of the chernobyl accident was created and received us million, mainly from japan, in hopes of discovering the main cause of health problems due to iodine radiation. these funds were divided among ukraine, belarus, and russia, the three main affected countries, for further investigation of health effects. as there was significant corruption in former soviet countries, most of the foreign aid was given to russia, and no results from the funding were demonstrated.in , it became known that the ukrainian government in power at the time aimed to make chernobyl a tourist attraction.

the chernobyl accident attracted a great deal of interest. because of the distrust that many people had in the soviet authorities, which engaged in a major coverup of the disaster, a great deal of debate about the situation at the site occurred in the first world during the early days of the event. because of defective intelligence based on satellite imagery, it was thought that unit number three had also had a dire accident. journalists mistrusted many professionals, and they in turn encouraged the public to mistrust them.the accident raised already heightened concerns about fission reactors worldwide, and while most concern was focused on those of the same unusual design, hundreds of disparate nuclear reactor proposals, including those under construction at chernobyl, reactors numbers  and , were eventually cancelled. with ballooning costs as a result of new nuclear reactor safety system standards and the legal and political costs in dealing with the increasingly hostile/anxious public opinion, there was a precipitous drop in the rate of new reactor construction after .

the accident also raised concerns about the cavalier safety culture in the soviet nuclear power industry, slowing industry growth and forcing the soviet government to become less secretive about its operating procedures. the government coverup of the chernobyl disaster was a catalyst for glasnost, which paved the way for reforms leading to the soviet collapse. numerous structural and construction quality issues, as well as deviations from the original plant design, had been known to kgb since at least  and passed on to the central committee, which took no action and classified the information.in italy, the chernobyl accident was reflected in the outcome of the  referendum. as a result of that referendum, italy began phasing out its nuclear power plants in , a decision that was effectively reversed in . a  referendum reiterated italians strong objections to nuclear power, thus abrogating the governments  decision.in germany, the chernobyl accident led to the creation of a federal environment ministry, after several states had already created such a post. the post has been held, among others, by angela merkel who would later become leader of the opposition and then chancellor. the german environmental minister was given the authority over reactor safety as well, a responsibility the current minister still holds today. the chernobyl disaster is also credited with strengthening the antinuclear movement in germany, which culminated in the decision to end the use of nuclear power made by the  schrder government. a temporary reversal of this policy was in turn reverted after the fukushima nuclear disaster.

in direct response to the chernobyl disaster, a conference to create a convention on early notification of a nuclear accident was called in  by the international atomic energy agency. the resulting treaty has bound signatory member states to provide notification of any nuclear and radiation accidents that occur within its jurisdiction that could affect other states, along with the convention on assistance in the case of a nuclear accident or radiological emergency.the chernobyl disaster, along with the space shuttle challenger disaster, the three mile island accident, and the bhopal disaster have been used together as case studies, both by the us government and by third parties, in research concerning the root causes of such disasters, such as sleep deprivation and mismanagement.

the chernobyl tragedy has inspired many artists across the world to create works of art, animation, video games, theatre and cinema about the disaster. the hbo series chernobyl and the book voices from chernobyl by the ukrainianbelarusian writer svetlana alexievich are two wellknown works that talk about the catastrophe that destroyed millions of lives. the ukrainian artist roman gumanyuk created a series of artworks called pripyat lights, or chernobyl shadows that includes  oil paintings about the chernobyl accident. the series of artwork was exhibited at the national fine art museum of kyrgyzstan in bishkek, the kasteev state museum of arts of kazakhstan in almaty, the vashchenko art gallery of gomel in belarus, and at the museum of chernobyl in kharkiv in ukraine in the years .the video game s.t.a.l.k.e.r. shadows of chernobyl released by thq in , is a firstperson shooter set in the exclusion zone. a prequel called s.t.a.l.k.e.r. clear sky was released in  following with a sequel s.t.a.l.k.e.r. call of pripyat released in . finally, the horror film chernobyl diaries released in  is about six tourists that hire a tour guide to take them to the abandoned city of pripyat where they discover they are not alone.filmmakers have created documentaries that examine the aftermath of the disaster over the years. documentaries like the oscarwinning chernobyl heart released in , explore how radiation affected people living in the area and information about the longterm side effects of radiation exposure over the years that include mental disabilities, physical disabilities, and genetic mutations after the disaster.the babushkas of chernobyl released in , is a documentary that explores the story of the three women who decided to return to the exclusion zone after the disaster. in the documentary, the babushkas show the polluted water, their food from radioactive gardens, and explain how they manage to survive in this exclusion zone despite the radioactive levels of it. the documentary the battle of chernobyl, released in , shows a rare original footage a day before the disaster in the city of pripyat, then through different methods the documentary goes in depth on the chronological events that led to the explosion of the reactor no.  and the disaster response in which , men from soviet union engaged to liquidate the radioactivity of the damaged reactor.

in july , ukrainian president volodymyr zelenskyy announced that the chernobyl site would become an official tourist attraction. zelenskyy said, we must give this territory of ukraine a new life, after chernobyl saw an increase in visitors since the hbo miniseries. dr. t. steen, a microbiology and immunology teacher at georgetowns school of medicine, recommends tourists to wear clothes and shoes they are comfortable with throwing away. most importantly, steen suggests to avoid plant life, especially the depths of the forest due to the high levels of radiation. because the areas were not cleaned in the aftermath of the disaster, they remain highly contaminated. research showed that fungus, moss, and mushrooms are radioactive. drinking or eating from there could be dangerous. generally speaking, chernobyl can be a safe place, dr. steen said, but it depends on how people behave.

elvis aaron presley , commonly referred by his first name, was an american singer and actor. known as the king of rock and roll, he is regarded as one of the most significant cultural figures of the th century. presleys energized interpretations of songs and sexually provocative performance style, combined with a singularly potent mix of influences across color lines during a transformative era in race relations, brought both great success and initial controversy.

presley was born in tupelo, mississippi, and relocated to memphis, tennessee, with his family at age . his music career began there in , recording at sun records with producer sam phillips, who wanted to bring the sound of africanamerican music to a wider audience. presley, on rhythm acoustic guitar, and accompanied by lead guitarist scotty moore and bassist bill black, was a pioneer of rockabilly, an uptempo, backbeatdriven fusion of country music and rhythm and blues. in , drummer d. j. fontana joined to complete the lineup of presleys classic quartet and rca victor acquired his contract in a deal arranged by colonel tom parker, who would manage him for more than two decades. presleys first rca single, heartbreak hotel, was released in january  and became a numberone hit in the united states. within a year, rca would sell ten million presley singles. with a series of successful television appearances and charttopping records, presley became the leading figure of the newly popular rock and roll; though his performative style and promotion of the thenmarginalized sound of african americans led to him being widely considered a threat to the moral wellbeing of white american youth.in november , presley made his film debut in love me tender. drafted into military service in , he relaunched his recording career two years later with some of his most commercially successful work. presley held few concerts, however, and guided by parker, proceeded to devote much of the s to making hollywood films and soundtrack albums, most of them critically derided. some of his most famous films included jailhouse rock , blue hawaii , and viva las vegas . in , following a sevenyear break from live performances, he returned to the stage in the acclaimed television comeback special elvis, which led to an extended las vegas concert residency and a string of highly profitable tours. in , presley gave the first concert by a solo artist to be broadcast around the world, aloha from hawaii. however, years of prescription drug abuse and unhealthy eating habits severely compromised his health, and presley died suddenly in  at his graceland estate at the age of .

having sold roughly  million records worldwide, presley is one of the bestselling music artists of all time. he was commercially successful in many genres, including pop, country, rhythm  blues, adult contemporary, and gospel. he won three grammy awards, received the grammy lifetime achievement award at age , and has been inducted into multiple music halls of fame. he also holds several records, including the most riaacertified gold and platinum albums, the most albums charted on the billboard , the most numberone albums by a solo artist on the uk albums chart, and the most numberone singles by any act on the uk singles chart. in , presley was posthumously awarded the presidential medal of freedom.

elvis aaron presley was born on january , , in tupelo, mississippi, to vernon presley and gladys love  presley in a tworoom shotgun house that his father built for the occasion. elvis identical twin, jesse garon presley, was delivered stillborn thirtyfive minutes before him. presley became close to both parents and formed an especially close bond with his mother. the family attended an assembly of god church, where he found his initial musical inspiration.

presleys father was of irish, german, scottish, and english origins, and a descendant of the harrison family of virginia. presleys mother gladys was scotsirish with some norman french ancestry. she and the rest of the family believed that her greatgreatgrandmother, morning dove white, was cherokee. this belief was restated by elviss granddaughter riley keough in . elaine dundy, in her biography, supports the belief.vernon moved from one odd job to the next, showing little ambition. the family often relied on help from neighbors and government food assistance. in  they lost their home after vernon was found guilty of altering a check. he was jailed for eight months while gladys and elvis moved in with relatives.in september , presley entered first grade at east tupelo consolidated, where his teachers regarded him as average. he was encouraged to enter a singing contest after impressing his schoolteacher with a rendition of red foleys country song old shep during morning prayers. the contest, held at the mississippialabama fair and dairy show on october , , was his first public performance. the tenyearold presley stood on a chair to reach the microphone and sang old shep. he recalled placing fifth. a few months later, presley received his first guitar for his birthday; he had hoped for something elseby different accounts, either a bicycle or a rifle. over the following year, he received basic guitar lessons from two of his uncles and a pastor at the familys church. presley recalled, i took the guitar, and i watched people, and i learned to play a little bit. but i would never sing in public. i was very shy about it.in september , presley entered a new school, milam, for sixth grade; he was regarded as a loner. the following year, he began bringing his guitar to school. he played and sang during lunchtime and was often teased as a trashy kid who played hillbilly music. presley was a devotee of mississippi slims show on the tupelo radio station welo. he was described as crazy about music by slims younger brother, who was one of presleys classmates and often took him into the station. slim supplemented presleys guitar instruction by demonstrating chord techniques. when his protg was aged , slim scheduled him for two onair performances. presley was overcome by stage fright the first time but performed the following week.

in november , the family moved to memphis, tennessee. after residing for nearly a year in rooming houses, they were granted a twobedroom apartment in the public housing complex known as the lauderdale courts. enrolled at l. c. humes high school, presley received only a c in music in eighth grade. when his music teacher told him that he had no aptitude for singing, he brought in his guitar the next day and sang a recent hit, keep them cold icy fingers off me, to prove otherwise. a classmate later recalled that the teacher agreed that elvis was right when he said that she didnt appreciate his kind of singing. he was usually too shy to perform openly and was occasionally bullied by classmates who viewed him as a mamas boy.in , presley began practicing guitar regularly under the tutelage of lee denson, a neighbor. they and three other boysincluding two future rockabilly pioneers, brothers dorsey and johnny burnetteformed a loose musical collective that played frequently around the courts. that september, presley began working as an usher at loews state theater. other jobs followed at precision tool, another stint at loews, and marl metal products.

during his junior year, presley began to stand out more among his classmates, largely because of his appearance he grew his sideburns and styled his hair with rose oil and vaseline. in his free time, he would head down to beale street, the heart of memphis thriving blues scene, and gaze longingly at the wild, flashy clothes in the windows of lansky brothers. by his senior year, he was wearing those clothes. overcoming his reticence about performing outside the courts, he competed in humes annual minstrel show in april . singing and playing guitar, he opened with till i waltz again with you, a recent hit for teresa brewer. presley recalled that the performance did much for his reputation i wasnt popular in school ... i failed musiconly thing i ever failed. and then they entered me in this talent show ... when i came onstage, i heard people kind of rumbling and whispering and so forth, cause nobody knew i even sang. it was amazing how popular i became in school after that.

presley, who received no formal music training and could not read music, studied and played by ear. he also visited record stores that provided jukeboxes and listening booths to customers. he knew all of hank snows songs, and he loved records by other country singers such as roy acuff, ernest tubb, ted daffan, jimmie rodgers, jimmie davis, and bob wills. the southern gospel singer jake hess, one of his favorite performers, was a significant influence on his balladsinging style. presley was a regular audience member at the monthly allnight singings downtown, where many of the white gospel groups that performed reflected the influence of african american spiritual music. he adored the music of black gospel singer sister rosetta tharpe.presley listened to regional radio stations, such as wdia, that played what were then called race records spirituals, blues, and the modern, backbeatheavy sound of rhythm and blues. like some of his peers, he may have attended blues venues only on nights designated for exclusively white audiencesa necessity in the segregated south. many of his future recordings were inspired by local africanamerican musicians such as arthur crudup and rufus thomas. b.b. king recalled that he had known presley before he was popular when they both used to frequent beale street. by the time he graduated from high school in june , presley had already singled out music as his future.

in august , presley checked into the offices of memphis recording service, the company run by sam phillips before he started sun records. he aimed to pay for a few minutes of studio time to record a twosided acetate disc my happiness and thats when your heartaches begin. he later claimed that he intended the record as a birthday gift for his mother, or that he was merely interested in what he sounded like, although there was a much cheaper, amateur recordmaking service at a nearby general store. biographer peter guralnick argued that presley chose sun in the hope of being discovered. asked by receptionist marion keisker what kind of singer he was, presley responded, i sing all kinds. when she pressed him on who he sounded like, he repeatedly answered, i dont sound like nobody. after he recorded, phillips asked keisker to note down the young mans name, which she did along with her own commentary good ballad singer. hold.in january , presley cut a second acetate at sunill never stand in your way and it wouldnt be the same without youbut again nothing came of it. not long after, he failed an audition for a local vocal quartet, the songfellows, explaining to his father, they told me i couldnt sing. songfellow jim hamill later claimed that he was turned down because he did not demonstrate an ear for harmony at the time. in april, presley began working for the crown electric company as a truck driver. his friend ronnie smith, after playing a few local gigs with him, suggested he contact eddie bond, leader of smiths professional band, which had an opening for a vocalist. bond rejected him after a tryout, advising presley to stick to truck driving because youre never going to make it as a singer.phillips, meanwhile, was always on the lookout for someone who could bring to a broader audience the sound of the black musicians on whom sun focused. as keisker reported, over and over i remember sam saying, if i could find a white man who had the negro sound and the negro feel, i could make a billion dollars. in june, he acquired a demo recording by jimmy sweeney of a ballad, without you, that he thought might suit presley. the teenaged singer came by the studio but was unable to do it justice. despite this, phillips asked presley to sing as many numbers as he knew. he was sufficiently affected by what he heard to invite two local musicians, guitarist winfield scotty moore and upright bass player bill black, to work something up with presley for a recording session.

the session, held the evening of july , proved entirely unfruitful until late in the night. as they were about to abort and go home, presley took his guitar and launched into a  blues number, arthur crudups thats all right. moore recalled, all of a sudden, elvis just started singing this song, jumping around and acting the fool, and then bill picked up his bass, and he started acting the fool, too, and i started playing with them. sam, i think, had the door to the control booth open ... he stuck his head out and said, what are you doing and we said, we dont know. well, back up, he said, try to find a place to start, and do it again. phillips quickly began taping; this was the sound he had been looking for.three days later, popular memphis disc jockey dewey phillips  played thats all right on his red, hot, and blue show. listeners began phoning in, eager to find out who the singer was. the interest was such that phillips played the record repeatedly during the remaining two hours of his show. interviewing presley onair, phillips asked him what high school he attended to clarify his color for the many callers who had assumed that he was black. during the next few days, the trio recorded a bluegrass song, bill monroes blue moon of kentucky, again in a distinctive style and employing a juryrigged echo effect that sam phillips dubbed slapback. a single was pressed with thats all right on the aside and blue moon of kentucky on the reverse.

the trio played publicly for the first time at the bon air club on july , presley still sporting his childsize guitar. at the end of the month, they appeared at the overton park shell, with slim whitman headlining. here elvis pioneered rubber legs, his signature style dance movement that he is best known for. a combination of his strong response to rhythm and nervousness at playing before a large crowd led presley to shake his legs as he performed his widecut pants emphasized his movements, causing young women in the audience to start screaming. moore recalled, during the instrumental parts, he would back off from the mike and be playing and shaking, and the crowd would just go wild. black, a natural showman, whooped and rode his bass, hitting double licks that presley would later remember as really a wild sound, like a jungle drum or something.soon after, moore and black left their old band, the starlite wranglers, to play with presley regularly, and disc jockey/promoter bob neal became the trios manager. from august through october, they played frequently at the eagles nest club, a dance venue on the second floor of the clearpool recreation complex in memphis. when presley played his fifteenminute sets, teenagers rushed from the pool to fill the club, then left again as the house western swing band resumed. presley quickly grew more confident on stage. according to moore, his movement was a natural thing, but he was also very conscious of what got a reaction. hed do something one time and then he would expand on it real quick. amid these live performances, presley returned to sun studio for more recording sessions. presley made what would be his only appearance on nashvilles grand ole opry on october ; after a polite audience response, opry manager jim denny told phillips that his singer was not bad but did not suit the program.

in november , presley performed on louisiana hayridethe oprys chief, and more adventurous, rival. the shreveportbased show was broadcast to  radio stations in  states. presley had another attack of nerves during the first set, which drew a muted reaction. a more composed and energetic second set inspired an enthusiastic response. house drummer d. j. fontana brought a new element, complementing presleys movements with accented beats that he had mastered playing in strip clubs. soon after the show, the hayride engaged presley for a years worth of saturdaynight appearances. trading in his old guitar for  , he purchased a martin instrument for   and his trio began playing in new locales, including houston, texas, and texarkana, arkansas.many fledgling performers, like minnie pearl, johnny horton, and johnny cash, sang the praises of louisiana hayride sponsor southern maid donuts, including presley, who developed a lifelong love of donuts. presley made his singular product endorsement commercial for the donut company, which was never released, recording a radio jingle in exchange for a box of hot glazed doughnuts. presley made his first television appearance on the kslatv television broadcast of louisiana hayride. soon after, he failed an audition for arthur godfreys talent scouts on the cbs television network. by early , presleys regular hayride appearances, constant touring, and wellreceived record releases had made him a regional star, from tennessee to west texas.in january, neal signed a formal management contract with presley and brought him to the attention of colonel tom parker, whom he considered the best promoter in the music business. parker, born in the netherlands, had immigrated illegally to the u.s. and claimed to be from west virginia; he had acquired an honorary colonels commission from the louisiana governor and country singer jimmie davis. having successfully managed the top country star eddy arnold, parker was working with the new numberone country singer, hank snow. parker booked presley on snows february tour. when the tour reached odessa, texas, a yearold roy orbison saw presley for the first time his energy was incredible, his instinct was just amazing. ... i just didnt know what to make of it. there was just no reference point in the culture to compare it.by august, sun had released ten sides credited to elvis presley, scotty and bill; on the latest recordings, the trio were joined by a drummer. some of the songs, like thats all right, were in what one memphis journalist described as the rb idiom of negro field jazz; others, like blue moon of kentucky, were more in the country field, but there was a curious blending of the two different musics in both. this blend of styles made it difficult for presleys music to find radio airplay. according to neal, many countrymusic disc jockeys would not play it because presley sounded too much like a black artist and none of the rb stations would touch him because he sounded too much like a hillbilly. the blend came to be known as rockabilly. at the time, presley was variously billed as the king of western bop, the hillbilly cat, and the memphis flash.presley renewed neals management contract in august , simultaneously appointing parker as his special adviser. the group maintained an extensive touring schedule throughout the second half of the year. neal recalled, it was almost frightening, the reaction that came to elvis from the teenaged boys. so many of them, through some sort of jealousy, would practically hate him. there were occasions in some towns in texas when wed have to be sure to have a police guard because somebodyd always try to take a crack at him. theyd get a gang and try to waylay him or something. the trio became a quartet when hayride drummer fontana joined as a full member. in midoctober, they played a few shows in support of bill haley, whose rock around the clock track had been a numberone hit the previous year. haley observed that presley had a natural feel for rhythm, and advised him to sing fewer ballads.at the country disc jockey convention in early november, presley was voted the years most promising male artist. several record companies had by now shown interest in signing him. after three major labels made offers of up to ,, parker and phillips struck a deal with rca victor on november  to acquire presleys sun contract for an unprecedented ,. presley, now aged , was legally still a minor, so his father signed the contract. parker arranged with the owners of hill  range publishing, jean and julian aberbach, to create two entities, elvis presley music and gladys music, to handle all the new material recorded by presley. songwriters were obliged to forgo onethird of their customary royalties in exchange for having presley perform their compositions. by december, rca had begun to heavily promote its new singer, and before months end had reissued many of his sun recordings.

on january , , presley made his first recordings for rca in nashville. extending his bynow customary backup of moore, black, fontana, and hayride pianist floyd cramerwho had been performing at live club dates with presleyrca enlisted guitarist chet atkins and three background singers, including gordon stoker of the popular jordanaires quartet, to fill in the sound. the session produced the moody, unusual heartbreak hotel, released as a single on january . parker finally brought presley to national television, booking him on cbss stage show for six appearances over two months. the program, produced in new york city, was hosted on alternate weeks by big band leaders and brothers tommy and jimmy dorsey. after his first appearance, on january , presley stayed in town to record at rca victors new york studio. the sessions yielded eight songs, including a cover of carl perkins rockabilly anthem blue suede shoes. in february, presleys i forgot to remember to forget, a sun recording initially released the previous august, reached the top of the billboard country chart. neals contract was terminated, and, on march , parker became presleys manager.rca released presleys selftitled debut album on march . joined by five previously unreleased sun recordings, its seven recently recorded tracks were of a broad variety. there were two country songs and a bouncy pop tune. the others would centrally define the evolving sound of rock and roll blue suede shoesan improvement over perkins in almost every way, according to critic robert hilburnand three rb numbers that had been part of presleys stage repertoire for some time, covers of little richard, ray charles, and the drifters. as described by hilburn, these were the most revealing of all. unlike many white artists ... who watered down the gritty edges of the original rb versions of songs in the s, presley reshaped them. he not only injected the tunes with his own vocal character but also made guitar, not piano, the lead instrument in all three cases. it became the first rock and roll album to top the billboard chart, a position it held for ten weeks. while presley was not an innovative guitarist like moore or contemporary african american rockers bo diddley and chuck berry, cultural historian gilbert b. rodman argued that the albums cover image, of elvis having the time of his life on stage with a guitar in his hands played a crucial role in positioning the guitar ... as the instrument that best captured the style and spirit of this new music.

on april , presley made the first of two appearances on nbcs the milton berle show. his performance, on the deck of the uss hancock in san diego, california, prompted cheers and screams from an audience of sailors and their dates. a few days later, a flight taking presley and his band to nashville for a recording session left all three badly shaken when an engine died and the plane almost went down over arkansas. twelve weeks after its original release, heartbreak hotel became presleys first numberone pop hit. in late april he began a twoweek residency at the new frontier hotel and casino on the las vegas strip. the shows were poorly received by the conservative, middleaged hotel guestslike a jug of corn liquor at a champagne party, wrote a critic for newsweek. amid his vegas tenure, presley, who had serious acting ambitions, signed a sevenyear contract with paramount pictures. he began a tour of the midwest in midmay, taking in fifteen cities in as many days. he had attended several shows by freddie bell and the bellboys in vegas and was struck by their cover of hound dog, a hit in  for blues singer big mama thornton by songwriters jerry leiber and mike stoller. it became his new closing number.

after a show in la crosse, wisconsin, an urgent message on the letterhead of the local catholic dioceses newspaper was sent to fbi director j. edgar hoover. it warned that presley is a definite danger to the security of the united states. ... his actions and motions were such as to rouse the sexual passions of teenaged youth. ... after the show, more than , teenagers tried to gang into presleys room at the auditorium. ... indications of the harm presley did just in la crosse were the two high school girls ... whose abdomen and thigh had presleys autograph.

presleys second milton berle show appearance came on june  at nbcs hollywood studio, amid another hectic tour. milton berle persuaded presley to leave his guitar backstage, advising, let em see you, son. during the performance, presley abruptly halted an uptempo rendition of hound dog with a wave of his arm and launched into a slow, grinding version accentuated with energetic, exaggerated body movements. his gyrations created a storm of controversy. television critics were outraged jack gould of the new york times wrote, mr. presley has no discernible singing ability. ... his phrasing, if it can be called that, consists of the stereotyped variations that go with a beginners aria in a bathtub. ... his one specialty is an accented movement of the body ... primarily identified with the repertoire of the blond bombshells of the burlesque runway. ben gross of the new york daily news opined that popular music has reached its lowest depths in the grunt and groin antics of one elvis presley. ... elvis, who rotates his pelvis ... gave an exhibition that was suggestive and vulgar, tinged with the kind of animalism that should be confined to dives and bordellos. ed sullivan, whose own variety show was the nations most popular, declared presley unfit for family viewing. to presleys displeasure, he soon found himself being referred to as elvis the pelvis, which he called one of the most childish expressions i ever heard, comin from an adult.

the berle shows drew such high ratings that presley was booked for a july  appearance on nbcs the steve allen show in new york. allen, no fan of rock and roll, introduced a new elvis in a white bow tie and black tails. presley sang hound dog for less than a minute to a basset hound wearing a top hat and bow tie. as described by television historian jake austen, allen thought presley was talentless and absurd ... he set things up so that presley would show his contrition. allen later wrote that he found presleys strange, gangly, countryboy charisma, his hardtodefine cuteness, and his charming eccentricity intriguing and simply worked him into the customary comedy fabric of his program. just before the final rehearsal for the show, presley told a reporter, im holding down on this show. i dont want to do anything to make people dislike me. i think tv is important so im going to go along, but i wont be able to give the kind of show i do in a personal appearance. presley would refer back to the allen show as the most ridiculous performance of his career. later that night, he appeared on hy gardner calling, a popular local television show. pressed on whether he had learned anything from the criticism to which he was being subjected, presley responded, no, i havent, i dont feel like im doing anything wrong. ... i dont see how any type of music would have any bad influence on people when its only music. ... i mean, how would rock n roll music make anyone rebel against their parentsthe next day, presley recorded hound dog, along with any way you want me and dont be cruel. the jordanaires sang harmony, as they had on the steve allen show; they would work with presley through the s. a few days later, presley made an outdoor concert appearance in memphis, at which he announced, you know, those people in new york are not gonna change me none. im gonna show you what the real elvis is like tonight. in august, a judge in jacksonville, florida, ordered presley to tame his act. throughout the following performance, he largely kept still, except for wiggling his little finger suggestively in mockery of the order. the single pairing dont be cruel with hound dog ruled the top of the charts for eleven weeksa mark that would not be surpassed for thirtysix years. recording sessions for presleys second album took place in hollywood during the first week of september. leiber and stoller, the writers of hound dog, contributed love me.allens show with presley had, for the first time, beaten cbss the ed sullivan show in the ratings. sullivan, despite his june pronouncement, booked presley for three appearances for an unprecedented ,. the first, on september , , was seen by approximately  million viewersa record . percent of the television audience. actor charles laughton hosted the show, filling in while sullivan was recovering from a car accident. presley appeared in two segments that night from cbs television city in los angeles. according to legend, presley was shot only from the waist up. watching clips of the allen and berle shows with his producer, sullivan had opined that presley got some kind of device hanging down below the crotch of his pantsso when he moves his legs back and forth you can see the outline of his cock. ... i think its a coke bottle. ... we just cant have this on a sunday night. this is a family show sullivan publicly told tv guide, as for his gyrations, the whole thing can be controlled with camera shots. in fact, presley was shown headtotoe in the first and second shows. though the camerawork was relatively discreet during his debut, with legconcealing closeups when he danced, the studio audience reacted in customary style screaming. presleys performance of his forthcoming single, the ballad love me tender, prompted a recordshattering million advance orders. more than any other single event, it was this first appearance on the ed sullivan show that made presley a national celebrity of barely precedented proportions.accompanying presleys rise to fame, a cultural shift was taking place that he both helped inspire and came to symbolize. the historian marty jezer wrote that presley began the biggest pop craze since glenn miller and frank sinatra  and brought rock and roll to mainstream culture as presley set the artistic pace, other artists followed. ... presley, more than anyone else, gave the young a belief in themselves as a distinct and somehow unified generationthe first in america ever to feel the power of an integrated youth culture.

the audience response at presleys live shows became increasingly fevered. moore recalled, hed start out, you aint nothin but a hound dog, and theyd just go to pieces. theyd always react the same way. thered be a riot every time. at the two concerts he performed in september at the mississippialabama fair and dairy show, fifty national guardsmen were added to the police detail to ensure that the crowd would not cause a ruckus. elvis, presleys second rca album, was released in october and quickly rose to number one on the billboard. the album includes old shep, which he sang at the talent show in , and which now marked the first time he played piano on an rca session. according to guralnick, one can hear in the halting chords and the somewhat stumbling rhythm both the unmistakable emotion and the equally unmistakable valuing of emotion over technique. assessing the musical and cultural impact of presleys recordings from thats all right through elvis, rock critic dave marsh wrote that these records, more than any others, contain the seeds of what rock  roll was, has been and most likely what it may foreseeably become.presley returned to the ed sullivan show at its main studio in new york, hosted this time by its namesake, on october . after the performance, crowds in nashville and st. louis burned him in effigy. his first motion picture, love me tender, was released on november . though he was not topbilled, the films original titlethe reno brotherswas changed to capitalize on his latest numberone record love me tender had hit the top of the charts earlier that month. to further take advantage of presleys popularity, four musical numbers were added to what was originally a straight acting role. the film was panned by critics but did very well at the box office. presley would receive top billing on every subsequent film he made.on december , presley dropped into sun records, where carl perkins and jerry lee lewis were recording, and had an impromptu jam session along with johnny cash. though phillips no longer had the right to release any presley material, he made sure that the session was captured on tape. the results, none officially released for twentyfive years, became known as the million dollar quartet recordings. the year ended with a frontpage story in the wall street journal reporting that presley merchandise had brought in  million on top of his record sales, and billboards declaration that he had placed more songs in the top  than any other artist since records were first charted. in his first full year at rca victor, then the record industrys largest company, presley had accounted for over fifty percent of the labels singles sales.

presley made his third and final ed sullivan show appearance on january , on this occasion indeed shot only down to the waist. some commentators have claimed that parker orchestrated an appearance of censorship to generate publicity. in any event, as critic greil marcus describes, presley did not tie himself down. leaving behind the bland clothes he had worn on the first two shows, he stepped out in the outlandish costume of a pasha, if not a harem girl. from the makeup over his eyes, the hair falling in his face, the overwhelmingly sexual cast of his mouth, he was playing rudolph valentino in the sheik, with all stops out. to close, displaying his range and defying sullivans wishes, presley sang a gentle black spiritual, peace in the valley. at the end of the show, sullivan declared presley a real decent, fine boy. two days later, the memphis draft board announced that presley would be classified a and would probably be drafted sometime that year.each of the three presley singles released in the first half of  went to number one too much, all shook up, and  teddy bear. already an international star, he was attracting fans even where his music was not officially released. under the headline presley records a craze in soviet, the new york times reported that pressings of his music on discarded xray plates were commanding high prices in leningrad. between film shoots and recording sessions, presley purchased an room mansion, graceland, on march , , for the amount of ,. the mansion, which was about  miles  south of downtown memphis, was for himself and his parents. before the purchase, elvis recorded loving youthe soundtrack to his second film, which was released in july. it was his third straight numberone album. the title track was written by leiber and stoller, who were then retained to write four of the six songs recorded at the sessions for jailhouse rock, presleys next film. the songwriting team effectively produced the jailhouse sessions and developed a close working relationship with presley, who came to regard them as his goodluck charm. he was fast, said leiber. any demo you gave him he knew by heart in ten minutes. the title track became another numberone hit, as was the jailhouse rock ep.

presley undertook three brief tours during the year, continuing to generate a crazed audience response. a detroit newspaper suggested that the trouble with going to see elvis presley is that youre liable to get killed. villanova students pelted the singer with eggs in philadelphia, and in vancouver the crowd rioted after the end of the show, destroying the stage. frank sinatra, who had inspired both the swooning and screaming of teenage girls in the s, condemned the new musical phenomenon. in a magazine article, he decried rock and roll as brutal, ugly, degenerate, vicious. ... it fosters almost totally negative and destructive reactions in young people. it smells phoney and false. it is sung, played and written, for the most part, by cretinous goons. ... this rancidsmelling aphrodisiac i deplore. asked for a response, presley said, i admire the man. he has a right to say what he wants to say. he is a great success and a fine actor, but i think he shouldnt have said it. ... this is a trend, just the same as he faced when he started years ago.leiber and stoller were again in the studio for the recording of elvis christmas album. toward the end of the session, they wrote a song on the spot at presleys request santa claus is back in town, an innuendoladen blues. the holiday release stretched presleys string of numberone albums to four and would become the bestselling christmas album ever in the united states, with eventual sales of over  million worldwide. after the session, moore and blackdrawing only modest weekly salaries, sharing in none of presleys massive financial successresigned. though they were brought back on a per diem basis a few weeks later, it was clear that they had not been part of presleys inner circle for some time.on december , presley received his draft notice. he was granted a deferment to finish the forthcoming film king creole, in which , had already been invested by paramount and producer hal wallis. a couple of weeks into the new year, dont, another leiber and stoller tune, became presleys tenth numberone seller. it had been only twentyone months since heartbreak hotel had brought him to the top for the first time. recording sessions for the king creole soundtrack were held in hollywood in midjanuary . leiber and stoller provided three songs and were again on hand, but it would be the last time presley and the duo worked closely together. as stoller later recalled, presleys manager and entourage sought to wall him off he was removed. ... they kept him separate. a brief soundtrack session on february  marked another endingit was the final occasion on which black was to perform with presley. he died in .

on march , , presley was drafted into the united states army at fort chaffee in arkansas. his arrival was a major media event. hundreds of people descended on presley as he stepped from the bus; photographers then accompanied him into the installation. presley announced that he was looking forward to his military service, saying that he did not want to be treated any differently from anyone else the army can do anything it wants with me.between march  and september , , presley completed basic and advanced military training at fort hood in texas, where he was temporarily assigned to company a, d medium tank battalion, th armor. during the two weeks leave between his basic and advanced training in early june, he recorded five songs in nashville. in early august, presleys mother was diagnosed with hepatitis, and her condition rapidly worsened. presley was granted emergency leave to visit her and arrived in memphis on august . two days later, she died of heart failure at age . presley was devastated and never the same; their relationship had remained extremely closeeven into his adulthood, they would use baby talk with each other and presley would address her with pet names.

on october , , presley was assigned to the st medium tank battalion, d armor, d armored division, at ray barracks, west germany, where he served as an armor intelligence specialist. on november , he was promoted to private first class and on june , , to specialist fourth class. while on maneuvers, presley was introduced to amphetamines by another soldier. he became practically evangelical about their benefits, not only for energy but for strength and weight loss, and many of his friends in the outfit joined him in indulging. the army also introduced presley to karate, which he studied seriously, training with jrgen seydel. it became a lifelong interest, which he later included in his live performances. fellow soldiers have attested to presleys wish to be seen as an able, ordinary soldier despite his fame, and to his generosity. he donated his army pay to charity, purchased television sets for the base, and bought an extra set of fatigues for everyone in his outfit. presley was promoted to sergeant on february , .while in bad nauheim, presley, aged  at the time, met yearold priscilla beaulieu. priscilla said that due to their age difference when they met, he told her why, youre just a baby. they would eventually marry after a sevenandahalfyear courtship. in her autobiography, priscilla said that presley was concerned that his month spell in the military would ruin his career. in special services, he would have been able to give musical performances and remain in touch with the public, but parker had convinced him that to gain popular respect, he should serve his country as a regular soldier. media reports echoed presleys concerns about his career, but rca producer steve sholes and freddy bienstock of hill and range had carefully prepared for his twoyear hiatus. armed with a substantial amount of unreleased material, they kept up a regular stream of successful releases. between his induction and discharge, presley had ten top  hits, including wear my ring around your neck, the bestselling hard headed woman, and one night in , and  a fool such as i and the numberone a big hunk o love in . rca also generated four albums compiling previously issued material during this period, most successfully elvis golden records , which hit number three on the lp chart.

presley returned to the u.s. on march , , and was honorably discharged three days later. the train that carried him from new jersey to tennessee was mobbed all the way, and presley was called upon to appear at scheduled stops to please his fans. on the night of march , he entered rcas nashville studio to cut tracks for a new album along with a single, stuck on you, which was rushed into release and swiftly became a numberone hit. another nashville session two weeks later yielded a pair of his bestselling singles, the ballads its now or never and are you lonesome tonight, along with the rest of elvis is back the album features several songs described by greil marcus as full of chicago blues menace, driven by presleys own supermiked acoustic guitar, brilliant playing by scotty moore, and demonic sax work from boots randolph. elvis singing wasnt sexy, it was pornographic. as a whole, the record conjured up the vision of a performer who could be all things, according to music historian john robertson a flirtatious teenage idol with a heart of gold; a tempestuous, dangerous lover; a gutbucket blues singer; a sophisticated nightclub entertainer; a raucous rocker. released only days after recording was complete, it reached number two on the album chart.

presley returned to television on may  as a guest on the frank sinatra timex specialironic for both stars, given sinatras earlier excoriation of rock and roll. also known as welcome home elvis, the show had been taped in late march, the only time all year presley performed in front of an audience. parker secured an unheardof , fee for eight minutes of singing. the broadcast drew an enormous viewership.g.i. blues, the soundtrack to presleys first film since his return, was a numberone album in october. his first lp of sacred material, his hand in mine, followed two months later; it reached number  on the u.s. pop chart and number  in the united kingdom, remarkable figures for a gospel album. in february , presley performed two shows for a benefit event in memphis, on behalf of twentyfour local charities. during a luncheon preceding the event, rca presented him with a plaque certifying worldwide sales of over  million records. a twelvehour nashville session in midmarch yielded nearly all of presleys next studio album, something for everybody. as described by john robertson, it exemplifies the nashville sound, the restrained, cosmopolitan style that would define country music in the s. presaging much of what was to come from presley himself over the next halfdecade, the album is largely a pleasant, unthreatening pastiche of the music that had once been elvis birthright. it would be his sixth numberone lp. another benefit concert, raising money for a pearl harbor memorial, was staged on march  in hawaii. it was to be presleys last public performance for seven years.

parker had by now pushed presley into a heavy filmmaking schedule, focused on formulaic, modestly budgeted musical comedies. presley initially insisted on pursuing higher roles, but when two films in a more dramatic veinflaming star  and wild in the country were less commercially successful, he reverted to the formula. among the twentyseven films he made during the s, there were a few further exceptions. his films were almost universally panned; critic andrew caine dismissed them as a pantheon of bad taste. nonetheless, they were virtually all profitable. hal wallis, who produced nine of them, declared, a presley picture is the only sure thing in hollywood.of presleys films in the s, fifteen were accompanied by soundtrack albums and another five by soundtrack eps. the films rapid production and release schedulespresley frequently starred in three a yearaffected his music. according to jerry leiber, the soundtrack formula was already evident before presley left for the army three ballads, one mediumtempo number, one uptempo, and one break blues boogie. as the decade wore on, the quality of the soundtrack songs grew progressively worse. julie parrish, who appeared in paradise, hawaiian style , says that presley disliked many of the songs chosen for his films. the jordanaires gordon stoker describes how he would retreat from the studio microphone the material was so bad that he felt like he couldnt sing it. most of the film albums featured a song or two from respected writers such as the team of doc pomus and mort shuman. but by and large, according to biographer jerry hopkins, the numbers seemed to be written on order by men who never really understood elvis or rock and roll. regardless of the songs quality, it has been argued that presley generally sang them well, with commitment. critic dave marsh heard the opposite presley isnt trying, probably the wisest course in the face of material like no room to rumba in a sports car and rockahula baby.in the first half of the decade, three of presleys soundtrack albums were ranked number one on the pop charts, and a few of his most popular songs came from his films, such as cant help falling in love  and return to sender .  but, as with artistic merit, the commercial returns steadily diminished. from  through , presley had only one topten hit crying in the chapel , a gospel number recorded in . as for nonfilm albums, between the june  release of pot luck and the november  release of the soundtrack to the television special that signaled his comeback, only one lp of new material by presley was issued the gospel album how great thou art . it won him his first grammy award, for best sacred performance. as marsh described, presley was arguably the greatest white gospel singer of his time and really the last rock  roll artist to make gospel as vital a component of his musical personality as his secular songs.shortly before christmas , more than seven years since they first met, presley proposed to priscilla beaulieu. they were married on may , , in a brief ceremony in their suite at the aladdin hotel in las vegas. the flow of formulaic films and assemblyline soundtracks rolled on. it was not until october , when the clambake soundtrack lp registered record low sales for a new presley album, that rca executives recognized a problem. by then, of course, the damage had been done, as historians connie kirchberg and marc hendrickx put it. elvis was viewed as a joke by serious music lovers and a hasbeen to all but his most loyal fans.

presleys only child, lisa marie, was born on february , , during a period when he had grown deeply unhappy with his career. of the eight presley singles released between january  and may , only two charted in the top , and none higher than number . his forthcoming soundtrack album, speedway, would rank at number  on the billboard chart. parker had already shifted his plans to television, where presley had not appeared since the sinatra timex show in . he maneuvered a deal with nbc that committed the network to both finance a theatrical feature and broadcast a christmas special.recorded in late june in burbank, california, the special, simply called elvis, aired on december , . later known as the  comeback special, the show featured lavishly staged studio productions as well as songs performed with a band in front of a small audiencepresleys first live performances since . the live segments saw presley dressed in tight black leather, singing and playing guitar in an uninhibited style reminiscent of his early rock and roll days. director and coproducer steve binder had worked hard to produce a show that was far from the hour of christmas songs parker had originally planned. the show, nbcs highestrated that season, captured fortytwo percent of the total viewing audience. jon landau of eye magazine remarked, there is something magical about watching a man who has lost himself find his way back home. he sang with the kind of power people no longer expect of rock n roll singers. he moved his body with a lack of pretension and effort that must have made jim morrison green with envy. marsh calls the performance one of emotional grandeur and historical resonance.by january , the single if i can dream, written for the special, reached number . the soundtrack album rose into the top ten. according to friend jerry schilling, the special reminded presley of what he had not been able to do for years, being able to choose the people; being able to choose what songs and not being told what had to be on the soundtrack. ... he was out of prison, man. binder said of presleys reaction, i played elvis the minute show, and he told me in the screening room, steve, its the greatest thing ive ever done in my life. i give you my word i will never sing a song i dont believe in.

buoyed by the experience of the comeback special, presley engaged in a prolific series of recording sessions at american sound studio, which led to the acclaimed from elvis in memphis. released in june , it was his first secular, nonsoundtrack album from a dedicated period in the studio in eight years. as described by marsh, it is a masterpiece in which presley immediately catches up with pop music trends that had seemed to pass him by during the movie years. he sings country songs, soul songs and rockers with real conviction, a stunning achievement. the album featured the hit single in the ghetto, issued in april, which reached number three on the pop chartpresleys first nongospel top ten hit since bossa nova baby in . further hit singles were culled from the american sound sessions suspicious minds, dont cry daddy, and kentucky rain.presley was keen to resume regular live performing. following the success of the comeback special, offers came in from around the world. the london palladium offered parker us,  for a oneweek engagement. he responded, thats fine for me, now how much can you get for elvis in may, the brandnew international hotel in las vegas, boasting the largest showroom in the city, announced that it had booked presley. he was scheduled to perform fiftyseven shows over four weeks, beginning july . moore, fontana, and the jordanaires declined to participate, afraid of losing the lucrative session work they had in nashville. presley assembled new, topnotch accompaniment, led by guitarist james burton and including two gospel groups, the imperials and sweet inspirations. costume designer bill belew, responsible for the intense leather styling of the comeback special, created a new stage look for presley, inspired by his passion for karate. nonetheless, presley was nervous his only previous las vegas engagement, in , had been dismal. parker, who intended to make presleys return the show business event of the year, oversaw a major promotional push. for his part, international hotel owner kirk kerkorian arranged to send his own plane to new york to fly in rock journalists for the debut performance.presley took to the stage without introduction. the audience of ,, including many celebrities, gave him a standing ovation before he sang a note and another after his performance. a third followed his encore, cant help falling in love . at a press conference after the show, when a journalist referred to him as the king, presley gestured toward fats domino, who was taking in the scene. no, presley said, thats the real king of rock and roll. the next day, parkers negotiations with the hotel resulted in a fiveyear contract for presley to play each february and august, at an annual salary of  million. newsweek commented, there are several unbelievable things about elvis, but the most incredible is his staying power in a world where meteoric careers fade like shooting stars. rolling stone called presley supernatural, his own resurrection. in november, presleys final nonconcert film, change of habit, opened. the double album from memphis to vegas/from vegas to memphis came out the same month; the first lp consisted of live performances from the international, the second of more cuts from the american sound sessions. suspicious minds reached the top of the chartspresleys first u.s. pop numberone in over seven years, and his last.cassandra peterson, later televisions elvira, met presley during this period in las vegas, where she was working as a showgirl. she recalled of their encounter, he was so antidrug when i met him. i mentioned to him that i smoked marijuana, and he was just appalled. he said, dont ever do that again. presley was not only deeply opposed to recreational drugs, he also rarely drank. several of his family members had been alcoholics, a fate he intended to avoid.

presley returned to the international early in  for the first of the years twomonthlong engagements, performing two shows a night. recordings from these shows were issued on the album on stage. in late february, presley performed six attendancerecordbreaking shows at the houston astrodome. in april, the single the wonder of you was issueda number one hit in the uk, it topped the u.s. adult contemporary chart, as well. metrogoldwynmayer  filmed rehearsal and concert footage at the international during august for the documentary elvis thats the way it is. presley was performing in a jumpsuit, which would become a trademark of his live act. during this engagement, he was threatened with murder unless us,  was paid. presley had been the target of many threats since the s, often without his knowledge. the fbi took the threat seriously and security was stepped up for the next two shows. presley went onstage with a derringer in his right boot and a . caliber pistol in his waistband, but the concerts succeeded without any incidents.the album thats the way it is, produced to accompany the documentary and featuring both studio and live recordings, marked a stylistic shift. as music historian john robertson noted, the authority of presleys singing helped disguise the fact that the album stepped decisively away from the americanroots inspiration of the memphis sessions towards a more middleoftheroad sound. with country put on the back burner, and soul and rb left in memphis, what was left was very classy, very clean white popperfect for the las vegas crowd, but a definite retrograde step for elvis. after the end of his international engagement on september , presley embarked on a weeklong concert tour, largely of the south, his first since . another weeklong tour, of the west coast, followed in november.

on december , , presley engineered a meeting with u.s. president richard nixon at the white house, where he expressed his patriotism and explained how he believed he could reach out to the hippies to help combat the drug culture he and the president abhorred. he asked nixon for a bureau of narcotics and dangerous drugs badge, to add to similar items he had begun collecting and to signify official sanction of his patriotic efforts. nixon, who apparently found the encounter awkward, expressed a belief that presley could send a positive message to young people and that it was, therefore, important that he retain his credibility. presley told nixon that the beatles, whose songs he regularly performed in concert during the era, exemplified what he saw as a trend of antiamericanism. presley and his friends previously had a fourhour gettogether with the beatles at his home in bel air, california, in august . on hearing reports of the meeting, paul mccartney later said that he felt a bit betrayed. ... the great joke was that we were taking illegal drugs, and look what happened to him, a reference to presleys early death linked to prescription drug abuse.  later elvis would call the white house to speak with president jimmy carter to request a presidential pardon for a friend who had not yet been tried.the u.s. junior chamber of commerce named presley one of its annual ten most outstanding young men of the nation on january , . not long after, the city of memphis named the stretch of highway  south on which graceland is located elvis presley boulevard. the same year, presley became the first rock and roll singer to be awarded the lifetime achievement award  by the national academy of recording arts and sciences, the grammy award organization. three new, nonfilm presley studio albums were released in , as many as had come out over the previous eight years. best received by critics was elvis country, a concept record that focused on genre standards. the biggest seller was elvis sings the wonderful world of christmas, the truest statement of all, according to greil marcus. in the midst of ten painfully genteel christmas songs, every one sung with appalling sincerity and humility, one could find elvis tomcatting his way through six blazing minutes of merry christmas baby, a raunchy old charles brown blues. ... if presleys sin was his lifelessness, it was his sinfulness that brought him to life.

mgm again filmed presley in april , this time for elvis on tour, which went on to win the golden globe award for best documentary film for that years golden globe awards. his gospel album he touched me, released that month, would earn him his second grammy award for best inspirational performance, for that years grammy awards. a fourteendate tour commenced with an unprecedented four consecutive soldout shows at new yorks madison square garden. the evening concert on july  was recorded and issued in an lp form a week later. elvis as recorded at madison square garden became one of presleys biggestselling albums. after the tour, the single burning love was releasedpresleys last top ten hit on the u.s. pop chart. the most exciting single elvis has made since all shook up, wrote rock critic robert christgau. who else could make its coming closer, the flames are now licking my body sound like an assignation with james browns backup band

presley and his wife, meanwhile, had become increasingly distant, barely cohabiting. in , an affair he had with joyce bova resultedunbeknownst to himin her pregnancy and an abortion. he often raised the possibility of joyce moving into graceland, saying that he was likely to leave priscilla. the presleys separated on february , , after priscilla disclosed her relationship with mike stone, a karate instructor presley had recommended to her. priscilla related that when she told him, presley raped her, declaring, this is how a real man makes love to his woman. she later stated in an interview that she regretted her choice of words in describing the incident, and said it had been an overstatement. five months later, presleys new girlfriend, linda thompson, a songwriter and onetime memphis beauty queen, moved in with him. presley and his wife filed for divorce on august . according to joe moscheo of the imperials, the failure of presleys marriage was a blow from which he never recovered. at a rare press conference that june, a reporter had asked presley whether he was satisfied with his image. presley replied, well, the image is one thing and the human being another ... its very hard to live up to an image.in january , presley performed two benefit concerts for the kui lee cancer fund in connection with a groundbreaking television special, aloha from hawaii, which would be the first concert by a solo artist to be aired globally. the first show served as a practice run and backup should technical problems affect the live broadcast two days later. on january , aloha from hawaii aired live via satellite to primetime audiences in japan, south korea, thailand, the philippines, australia, and new zealand, as well as to u.s. servicemen based across southeast asia. in japan, where it capped a nationwide elvis presley week, it smashed viewing records. the next night, it was simulcast to twentyeight european countries, and in april an extended version finally aired in the u.s., where it won a fiftyseven percent share of the tv audience. over time, parkers claim that it was seen by one billion or more people would be broadly accepted, but that figure appeared to have been sheer invention. presleys stage costume became the most recognized example of the elaborate concert garb with which his latterday persona became closely associated. as described by bobbie ann mason, at the end of the show, when he spreads out his american eagle cape, with the full stretched wings of the eagle studded on the back, he becomes a god figure. the accompanying double album, released in february, went to number one and eventually sold over  million copies in the u.s. it was presleys last u.s. numberone pop album during his lifetime.at a midnight show that same month, four men rushed onto the stage in an apparent attack. security personnel came to presleys defense, and he ejected one invader from the stage himself. following the show, presley became obsessed with the idea that the men had been sent by mike stone, priscillas lover, to kill him. though they were shown to have been only overexuberant fans, presley raged, theres too much pain in me ... stone must die. his outbursts continued with such intensity that a physician was unable to calm him, despite administering large doses of medication. after another two full days of raging, red west, his friend and bodyguard, felt compelled to get a price for a contract killing and was relieved when presley decided, aw hell, lets just leave it for now. maybe its a bit heavy.

presleys divorce was finalized on october , . by then, his health was in serious decline. twice during the year he overdosed on barbiturates, spending three days in a coma in his hotel suite after the first incident. towards the end of , he was hospitalized, semicomatose from the effects of a pethidine addiction. according to his primary care physician, george c. nichopoulos, presley felt that by getting drugs from a doctor, he wasnt the common everyday junkie getting something off the street. since his comeback, he had staged more live shows with each passing year, and  saw  concerts, his busiest schedule ever. despite his failing health, he undertook another intensive touring schedule in .presleys condition declined precipitously that september. keyboardist tony brown remembered his arrival at a university of maryland concert he fell out of the limousine, to his knees. people jumped to help, and he pushed them away like, dont help me. he walked on stage and held onto the mic for the first thirty minutes like it was a post. everybodys looking at each other like, is the tour gonna happen guitarist john wilkinson recalled, he was all gut. he was slurring. he was so fucked up. ... it was obvious he was drugged. it was obvious there was something terribly wrong with his body. it was so bad the words to the songs were barely intelligible. ... i remember crying. he could barely get through the introductions.rca, which had always enjoyed a steady stream of product from presley, began to grow anxious as his interest in the recording studio waned. after a session in december  that produced eighteen songs, enough for almost two albums, presley made no official studio recordings in . parker delivered rca another concert record, elvis recorded live on stage in memphis. recorded on march , it included a version of how great thou art that won presley his third and final grammy award for best inspirational performance at that years grammy awards. all three of his competitive grammy wins  out of fourteen total nominations  were for gospel recordings. presley returned to the recording studio in hollywood in march , but parkers attempts to arrange another session toward the end of the year were unsuccessful. in , rca sent a mobile recording unit to graceland that made possible two fullscale recording sessions at presleys home. however, the recording process had become a struggle for him.

journalist tony scherman wrote that, by early , presley had become a grotesque caricature of his sleek, energetic former self. grossly overweight, his mind dulled by the pharmacopia he daily ingested, he was barely able to pull himself through his abbreviated concerts. according to andy greene of rolling stone, presleys final performances were mostly sad, sloppy affairs where a bloated, drugged presley struggled to remember his lyrics and get through the night without collapsing ... most everything from the final three years of his life is sad and hard to watch. in alexandria, louisiana, he was on stage for less than an hour and was impossible to understand. on march , he canceled a performance in baton rouge, unable to get out of his hotel bed; four shows had to be canceled and rescheduled.despite the accelerating deterioration of his health, presley fulfilled most of his touring commitments. according to guralnick, fans were becoming increasingly voluble about their disappointment, but it all seemed to go right past presley, whose world was now confined almost entirely to his room and his spiritualism books. presleys cousin, billy smith, recalled how he would sit in his room and chat for hours, sometimes recounting favorite monty python sketches and his past escapades, but more often gripped by paranoid obsessions that reminded smith of the billionaire recluse howard hughes.way down, presleys last single issued during his lifetime, was released on june , . that month, cbs taped two concerts for a television special, elvis in concert, to be broadcast in october. in the first, shot in omaha on june , presleys voice, guralnick writes, is almost unrecognizable, a small, childlike instrument in which he talks more than sings most of the songs, casts about uncertainly for the melody in others, and is virtually unable to articulate or project. two days later, in rapid city, south dakota, he looked healthier, seemed to have lost a little weight, and sounded better, too, though, by the conclusion of the performance, his face was framed in a helmet of blueblack hair from which sweat sheets down over pale, swollen cheeks. presleys final concert was held in indianapolis at market square arena, on june , .

on august , , presley was scheduled on an evening flight out of memphis to portland, maine, to begin another tour. that afternoon, however, his fiance ginger alden discovered him in an unresponsive state on the bathroom floor of his graceland mansion. biographer joel williamson suggests that involving a reaction to the codeine he had taken and attempts to move his bowelshe experienced pain and fright while sitting on the toilet. alarmed, he stood up ... and fell face down in the fetal position. drooling on the rug and unable to breathe, he died. attempts to revive him failed, and he was pronounced dead at baptist memorial hospital at  p.m. he was  years old.president jimmy carter issued a statement that credited presley with having permanently changed the face of american popular culture. thousands of people gathered outside graceland to view the open casket. one of presleys cousins, billy mann, accepted us,  to secretly photograph the body; the picture appeared on the cover of the national enquirers biggestselling issue ever. alden struck a ,  deal with the enquirer for her story, but settled for less when she broke her exclusivity agreement. presley left her nothing in his will.presleys funeral was held at graceland on thursday, august . outside the gates, a car plowed into a group of fans, killing two young women and critically injuring a third. about , people lined the processional route to forest hill cemetery, where presley was buried next to his mother. within a few weeks, way down topped the country and uk singles chart. following an attempt to steal presleys body in late august, the remains of both presley and his mother were exhumed and reburied in gracelands meditation garden on october . presley is buried alongside his parents, daughter, grandson and his paternal grandmother in the meditation garden at graceland.

while an autopsy, undertaken the same day presley died, was still in progress, memphis medical examiner jerry francisco announced that the immediate cause of death was cardiac arrest. asked if drugs were involved, he declared that drugs played no role in presleys death. in fact, drug use was heavily implicated in presleys death, writes guralnick. the pathologists conducting the autopsy thought it possible, for instance, that he had suffered anaphylactic shock brought on by the codeine pills he had gotten from his dentist, to which he was known to have had a mild allergy. a pair of lab reports filed two months later strongly suggested that polypharmacy was the primary cause of death; one reported fourteen drugs in elvis system, ten in significant quantity. in , forensic pathologist cyril wecht conducted a review of the reports and concluded that a combination of depressants had resulted in presleys accidental death. forensic historian and pathologist michael baden viewed the situation as complicated elvis had had an enlarged heart for a long time. that, together with his drug habit, caused his death. but he was difficult to diagnose; it was a judgment call.the competence and ethics of two of the centrally involved medical professionals were seriously questioned. francisco had offered a cause of death before the autopsy was complete; claimed the underlying ailment was cardiac arrhythmia, a condition that can be determined only in someone who is still alive; and denied drugs played any part in presleys death before the toxicology results were known. allegations of a coverup were widespread. while a  trial of presleys main physician, george c. nichopoulos, exonerated him of criminal liability for his death, the facts were startling in the first eight months of  alone, he had prescribed more than , doses of sedatives, amphetamines, and narcotics all in elvis name. nichopoulos license was suspended for three months. it was permanently revoked in the s after the tennessee medical board brought new charges of overprescription.in , the presley autopsy report was reopened. joseph davis, who had conducted thousands of autopsies as miamidade county coroner, declared at its completion, there is nothing in any of the data that supports a death from drugs. in fact, everything points to a sudden, violent heart attack. more recent research has revealed that francisco did not speak for the entire pathology team. other staff could say nothing with confidence until they got the results back from the laboratories, if then. that would be a matter of weeks. one of the examiners, e. eric muirhead, could not believe his ears. francisco had not only presumed to speak for the hospitals team of pathologists, he had announced a conclusion that they had not reached. ... early on, a meticulous dissection of the body ... confirmed that elvis was chronically ill with diabetes, glaucoma, and constipation. as they proceeded, the doctors saw evidence that his body had been wracked over a span of years by a large and constant stream of drugs. they had also studied his hospital records, which included two admissions for drug detoxification and methadone treatments. according to biographer frank coffey and dan warlick, one of the physicians who were present at the autopsy, presleys death was caused by a valsalva maneuver due to constipation as a result of drug abuse. when using the toilet, the strain of attempting to defecate compressed the singers abdominal aorta, shutting down his heart.

between  and , six of presleys posthumously released singles were topten country hits. graceland was opened to the public in . attracting over half a million visitors annually, it became the secondmostvisited home in the united states, after the white house. the residence was declared a national historic landmark in .presley has been inducted into five music halls of fame the rock and roll hall of fame , the country music hall of fame , the gospel music hall of fame , the rockabilly hall of fame , and the memphis music hall of fame . in , he received the w. c. handy award from the blues foundation and the academy of country musics first golden hat award. in , he received the american music awards award of merit.a junkie xl remix of presleys a little less conversation  was used in a nike advertising campaign during the  fifa world cup. it topped the charts in over twenty countries and was included in a compilation of presleys numberone hits, elvs, which was also an international success. the album returned presley to the top of the billboard chart for the first time in almost three decades.in , a remix of rubberneckin, a  recording of presleys, topped the u.s. sales chart, as did a thanniversary rerelease of thats all right the following year. the latter was an outright hit in britain, debuting at number three on the pop chart; it also made the top ten in canada. in , another three reissued singles, jailhouse rock, one night/i got stung, and its now or never, went to number one in the uk. they were part of a campaign that saw the rerelease of all eighteen of presleys previous charttopping uk singles. the first, all shook up, came with a collectors box that made it ineligible to chart again; each of the other seventeen reissues hit the british top five.in , forbes magazine named presley the topearning deceased celebrity for the fifth straight year, with a gross income of  million. he was placed second in , returned to the top spot the next two years, and ranked fourth in . the following year, he was ranked second, with his highest annual income ever millionspurred by the celebration of his th birthday and the launch of cirque du soleils viva elvis show in las vegas. in november , viva elvis the album was released, setting his voice to newly recorded instrumental tracks. as of mid, there were an estimated , licensed presley products, and he was again the secondhighestearning deceased celebrity. six years later, he ranked fourth with earnings of  million, up  million from  due in part to the opening of a new entertainment complex, elvis presleys memphis, and hotel, the guest house at graceland.in , rca/legacy released elvis presley  where no one stands alone, a new album focused on elvis love of gospel music. produced by joel weinshanker, lisa marie presley and andy childs, the album introduced newly recorded instrumentation along with vocals from singers who had performed in the past with elvis. it also included a reimagined duet with lisa marie, on the albums title track.in , baz luhrmanns film elvis, a biographical film about presleys life, was released in theaters. presley is portrayed by austin butler and parker by tom hanks. as of august , the film had grossed . million worldwide on a  million budget, becoming the secondhighestgrossing music biopic of alltime behind bohemian rhapsody , and the fifthhighestgrossing australianproduced film. for his portrayal of elvis, butler won the golden globe and was nominated for the oscar for best actor. in january , on what would have been presleys th birthday, his  lockheed  jetstar sold at an auction for ,. the plane sold at the mecum kissimmee collector car auction in florida.

presleys earliest musical influence came from gospel. his mother recalled that from the age of two, at the assembly of god church in tupelo attended by the family, he would slide down off my lap, run into the aisle and scramble up to the platform. there he would stand looking at the choir and trying to sing with them. in memphis, presley frequently attended allnight gospel singings at the ellis auditorium, where groups such as the statesmen quartet led the music in a style that, guralnick suggests, sowed the seeds of presleys future stage act

the statesmen were an electric combination ... featuring some of the most thrillingly emotive singing and daringly unconventional showmanship in the entertainment world ... dressed in suits that might have come out of the window of lanskys. ... bass singer jim wetherington, known universally as the big chief, maintained a steady bottom, ceaselessly jiggling first his left leg, then his right, with the material of the pants leg ballooning out and shimmering. he went about as far as you could go in gospel music, said jake hess. the women would jump up, just like they do for the pop shows. preachers frequently objected to the lewd movements ... but audiences reacted with screams and swoons.

as a teenager, presleys musical interests were wideranging, and he was deeply informed about both white and africanamerican musical idioms. though he never had any formal training, he had a remarkable memory, and his musical knowledge was already considerable by the time he made his first professional recordings aged  in . when jerry leiber and mike stoller met him two years later, they were astonished at his encyclopedic understanding of the blues, and, as stoller put it, he certainly knew a lot more than we did about country music and gospel music. at a press conference the following year, he proudly declared, i know practically every religious song thats ever been written.

presley played guitar, bass, and piano; he received his first guitar when he was  years old. he could not read or write music and had no formal lessons, and played everything by ear. presley often played an instrument on his recordings and produced his own music. presley played rhythm acoustic guitar on most of his sun recordings and his s rca albums. he played electric bass guitar on  baby i dont care after his bassist bill black had trouble with the instrument. presley played the bass line including the intro. presley played piano on songs such as old shep and first in line from his  album elvis. he is credited with playing piano on later albums such as from elvis in memphis and moody blue, and on unchained melody, which was one of the last songs that he recorded. presley played lead guitar on one of his successful singles called are you lonesome tonight. in the  comeback special, elvis took over on lead electric guitar, the first time he had ever been seen with the instrument in public, playing it on songs such as baby what you want me to do and one night. presley played the back of his guitar on some of his hits such as all shook up, dont be cruel, and  teddy bear, providing percussion by slapping the instrument to create a beat. the album elvis is back features presley playing a lot of acoustic guitar on songs such as i will be home again and like a baby.

presley was a central figure in the development of rockabilly, according to music historians. rockabilly crystallized into a recognizable style in  with elvis presleys first release, on the sun label, writes craig morrison. paul friedlander described rockabilly as essentially ... an elvis presley construction, with the defining elements as the raw, emotive, and slurred vocal style and emphasis on rhythmic feeling of the blues with the string band and strummed rhythm guitar of country. in thats all right, the presley trios first record, scotty moores guitar solo, a combination of merle travisstyle country fingerpicking, doublestop slides from acoustic boogie, and bluesbased bentnote, singlestring work, is a microcosm of this fusion. while katherine charlton calls presley rockabillys originator, carl perkins, another pioneer of rocknroll, said that sam phillips, elvis, and i didnt create rockabilly. according to michael campbell, the first major rockabilly song was recorded by bill haley. in moores view, it had been there for quite a while, really. carl perkins was doing basically the same sort of thing up around jackson, and i know for a fact jerry lee lewis had been playing that kind of music ever since he was ten years old.at rca victor, presleys rock and roll sound grew distinct from rockabilly with group chorus vocals, more heavily amplified electric guitars and a tougher, more intense manner. while he was known for taking songs from various sources and giving them a rockabilly/rock and roll treatment, he also recorded songs in other genres from early in his career, from the pop standard blue moon at sun records to the country ballad hows the world treating you on his second rca victor lp to the blues of santa claus is back in town. in , his first gospel record was released, the foursong ep peace in the valley. certified as a millionseller, it became the topselling gospel ep in recording history. presley would record gospel periodically for the rest of his life.

after his return from military service in , presley continued to perform rock and roll, but the characteristic style was substantially toned down. his first postarmy single, the numberone hit stuck on you, is typical of this shift. rca victor publicity referred to its mild rock beat; discographer ernst jorgensen calls it upbeat pop. the number five shes not you  integrates the jordanaires so completely, its practically doowop. the modern blues/rb sound captured with success on elvis is back was essentially abandoned for six years until such  recordings as down in the alley and hiheel sneakers. presleys output during most of the s emphasized pop music, often in the form of ballads such as are you lonesome tonight, a numberone in . its now or never, which also topped the chart that year, was a classically influenced variation of pop based on the neapolitan song o sole mio and concluding with a fullvoiced operatic cadence. these were both dramatic numbers, but most of what presley recorded for his many film soundtracks was in a much lighter vein.while presley performed several of his classic ballads for the  comeback special, the sound of the show was dominated by aggressive rock and roll. he recorded few new straight rock and roll songs thereafter; as he explained, they had become hard to find. a significant exception was burning love, his last major hit on the pop charts. like his work of the s, presleys subsequent recordings reworked pop and country songs, but in markedly different permutations. his stylistic range now began to embrace a more contemporary rock sound as well as soul and funk. much of elvis in memphis, as well as suspicious minds, cut at the same sessions, reflected this new rock and soul fusion. in the mids, many of his singles found a home on country radio, the field where he first became a star.

the developmental arc of presleys singing voice, as described by critic dave marsh, goes from high and thrilled in the early days, to lower and perplexed in the final months. marsh credits presley with the introduction of the vocal stutter on s baby lets play house. when on dont be cruel, presley slides into a mmmmm that marks the transition between the first two verses, he shows how masterful his relaxed style really is. marsh describes the vocal performance on cant help falling in love as one of gentle insistence and delicacy of phrasing, with the line shall i stay pronounced as if the words are fragile as crystal.jorgensen calls the  recording of how great thou art an extraordinary fulfillment of his vocal ambitions, as presley crafted for himself an adhoc arrangement in which he took every part of the fourpart vocal, from the bass intro to the soaring heights of the songs operatic climax, becoming a kind of oneman quartet. guralnick finds stand by me from the same gospel sessions a beautifully articulated, almost nakedly yearning performance, but, by contrast, feels that presley reaches beyond his powers on where no one stands alone, resorting to a kind of inelegant bellowing to push out a sound that jake hess of the statesmen quartet had in his command. hess himself thought that while others might have voices the equal of presleys, he had that certain something that everyone searches for all during their lifetime. guralnick attempts to pinpoint that something the warmth of his voice, his controlled use of both vibrato technique and natural falsetto range, the subtlety and deeply felt conviction of his singing were all qualities recognizably belonging to his talent but just as recognizably not to be achieved without sustained dedication and effort.marsh praises his  reading of u.s. male, bearing down on the hard guy lyrics, not sending them up or overplaying them but tossing them around with that astonishingly tough yet gentle assurance that he brought to his sun records. the performance on in the ghetto is, according to jorgensen, devoid of any of his characteristic vocal tricks or mannerisms, instead relying on the exceptional clarity and sensitivity of his voice. guralnick describes the songs delivery as of almost translucent eloquence ... so quietly confident in its simplicity. on suspicious minds, guralnick hears essentially the same remarkable mixture of tenderness and poise, but supplemented with an expressive quality somewhere between stoicism  and anguish .music critic henry pleasants observes that presley has been described variously as a baritone and a tenor. an extraordinary compass ... and a very wide range of vocal color have something to do with this divergence of opinion. he identifies presley as a high baritone, calculating his range as two octaves and a third, from the baritone low g to the tenor high b, with an upward extension in falsetto to at least a dflat. presleys best octave is in the middle, dflat to dflat, granting an extra full step up or down. in pleasants view, his voice was variable and unpredictable at the bottom, often brilliant at the top, with the capacity for fullvoiced high gs and as that an opera baritone might envy. scholar lindsay waters, who figures presleys range as twoandaquarter octaves, emphasizes that his voice had an emotional range from tender whispers to sighs down to shouts, grunts, grumbles, and sheer gruffness that could move the listener from calmness and surrender, to fear. his voice can not be measured in octaves, but in decibels; even that misses the problem of how to measure delicate whispers that are hardly audible at all. presley was always able to duplicate the open, hoarse, ecstatic, screaming, shouting, wailing, reckless sound of the black rhythmandblues and gospel singers, writes pleasants, and also demonstrated a remarkable ability to assimilate many other vocal styles.

when dewey phillips first aired thats all right on memphis whbq, many listeners who contacted the station by phone and telegram to ask for it again assumed that its singer was black. from the beginning of his national fame, presley expressed respect for africanamerican performers and their music, and disregard for the norms of segregation and racial prejudice then prevalent in the south. interviewed in , he recalled how in his childhood he would listen to blues musician arthur crudupthe originator of thats all rightbang his box the way i do now, and i said if i ever got to the place where i could feel all old arthur felt, id be a music man like nobody ever saw. the memphis world, an africanamerican newspaper, reported that presley, the rock n roll phenomenon, cracked memphis segregation laws by attending the local amusement park on what was designated as its colored night. such statements and actions led presley to be generally hailed in the black community during the early days of his stardom. in contrast, many white adults did not like him, and condemned him as depraved. antinegro prejudice doubtless figured in adult antagonism. regardless of whether parents were aware of the negro sexual origins of the phrase rock n roll, presley impressed them as the visual and aural embodiment of sex.despite the largely positive view of presley held by african americans, a rumor spread in mid that he had at some point announced, the only thing negroes can do for me is buy my records and shine my shoes. a journalist with the national african american weekly jet, louie robinson, pursued the story. on the set of jailhouse rock, presley granted robinson an interview, though he was no longer dealing with the mainstream press. he denied making such a statement i never said anything like that, and people who know me know that i wouldnt have said it. ... a lot of people seem to think i started this business. but rock n roll was here a long time before i came along. nobody can sing that kind of music like colored people. lets face it i cant sing like fats domino can. i know that. robinson found no evidence that the remark had ever been made, and on the contrary elicited testimony from many individuals indicating that presley was anything but racist. blues singer ivory joe hunter, who had heard the rumor before he visited graceland one evening, reported of presley, he showed me every courtesy, and i think hes one of the greatest. though the rumored remark was discredited, it was still being used against presley decades later.the persistence of such attitudes was fueled by resentment over the fact that presley, whose musical and visual performance idiom owed much to africanamerican sources, achieved the cultural acknowledgement and commercial success largely denied his black peers. into the st century, the notion that presley had stolen black music still found adherents. notable among africanamerican entertainers expressly rejecting this view was jackie wilson, who argued, a lot of people have accused elvis of stealing the black mans music, when in fact, almost every black solo entertainer copied his stage mannerisms from elvis. moreover, presley also acknowledged his debt to africanamerican musicians throughout his career. addressing his  comeback special audience, he said, rock n roll music is basically gospel or rhythm and blues, or it sprang from that. people have been adding to it, adding instruments to it, experimenting with it, but it all boils down to that. nine years earlier, he had said, rock n roll has been around for many years. it used to be called rhythm and blues.

presleys physical attractiveness and sexual appeal were widely acknowledged. he was once beautiful, astonishingly beautiful, according to critic mark feeney. television director steve binder, no fan of presleys music before he oversaw the  comeback special, reported, im straight as an arrow and i got to tell you, you stop, whether youre male or female, to look at him. he was that good looking. and if you never knew he was a superstar, it wouldnt make any difference; if hed walked in the room, youd know somebody special was in your presence. his performance style, as much as his physical beauty, was responsible for presleys eroticized image. writing in , critic george melly described him as the master of the sexual simile, treating his guitar as both phallus and girl. in his presley obituary, lester bangs credited him as the man who brought overt blatant vulgar sexual frenzy to the popular arts in america. ed sullivans declaration that he perceived a soda bottle in presleys trousers was echoed by rumors involving a similarly positioned toilet roll tube or lead bar.while presley was marketed as an icon of heterosexuality, some cultural critics have argued that his image was ambiguous. in , sight and sounds peter john dyer described his onscreen persona as aggressively bisexual in appeal. brett farmer places the orgasmic gyrations of the title dance sequence in jailhouse rock within a lineage of cinematic musical numbers that offer a spectacular eroticization, if not homoeroticization, of the male image. in the analysis of yvonne tasker, elvis was an ambivalent figure who articulated a peculiar feminised, objectifying version of white workingclass masculinity as aggressive sexual display.reinforcing presleys image as a sex symbol were the reports of his dalliances with various hollywood stars and starlets, from natalie wood in the s to connie stevens and annmargret in the s to candice bergen and cybill shepherd in the s. june juanico of memphis, one of presleys early girlfriends, later blamed parker for encouraging him to choose his dating partners with publicity in mind. presley never grew comfortable with the hollywood scene, and most of these relationships were insubstantial.

presley kept several horses at graceland, initially because of priscilla presley. he got me my first horse as a christmas present  domino, said priscilla. the horse named palomino rising sun was presley favorite horse, and there are many photographs of presley riding him.

presleys rise to national attention in  transformed the field of popular music and had a huge effect on the broader scope of popular culture. as the catalyst for the cultural revolution that was rock and roll, he was central not only to defining it as a musical genre but in making it a touchstone of youth culture and rebellious attitude. with its racially mixed originsrepeatedly affirmed by presleyrock and rolls occupation of a central position in mainstream american culture facilitated a new acceptance and appreciation of black culture.in this regard, little richard said of presley, he was an integrator. elvis was a blessing. they wouldnt let black music through. he opened the door for black music. al green agreed he broke the ice for all of us.president jimmy carter remarked on presleys legacy in  his music and his personality, fusing the styles of white country and black rhythm and blues, permanently changed the face of american popular culture. his following was immense, and he was a symbol to people the world over of the vitality, rebelliousness, and good humor of his country. presley also heralded the vastly expanded reach of celebrity in the era of mass communication at the age of , within a year of his first appearance on american network television, he was regarded as one of the most famous people in the world.

presleys name, image, and voice are recognized around the world. he has inspired a legion of impersonators. in polls and surveys, he is recognized as one of the most important popular music artists and influential americans. american composer and conductor leonard bernstein said, elvis presley is the greatest cultural force in the twentieth century. he introduced the beat to everything and he changed everythingmusic, language, clothes. its a whole new social revolutionthe sixties came from it. john lennon said that nothing really affected me until elvis. bob dylan described the sensation of first hearing presley as like busting out of jail.

for much of his adult life, presley, with his rise from poverty to riches and fame, had seemed to epitomize the american dream. in his final years, and following the revelations about his circumstances after his death, he became a symbol of excess and gluttony. increasing attention was paid to his appetite for the rich, heavy southern cooking of his upbringing, foods such as chickenfried steak and biscuits and gravy. in particular, his love of fried peanut butter, banana, and  bacon sandwiches, now known as elvis sandwiches, came to symbolize this characteristic. according to the media scholar robert thompson, the sandwich also signified presleys enduring allamerican appeal he wasnt only the king, he was one of us.since , there have been numerous alleged sightings of presley. a longstanding conspiracy theory among some fans is that he faked his death. adherents cite alleged discrepancies in the death certificate, reports of a wax dummy in his original coffin, and accounts of presley planning a diversion so he could retire in peace. an unusually large number of fans have domestic shrines devoted to presley and journey to sites with which he is connected, however faintly. every august , the anniversary of his death, thousands of people gather outside graceland and celebrate his memory with a candlelight ritual. with elvis, it is not just his music that has survived death, writes ted harrison. he himself has been raised, like a medieval saint, to a figure of cultic status. it is as if he has been canonized by acclamation.on the th anniversary of presleys death, the new york times asserted, all the talentless impersonators and appalling black velvet paintings on display can make him seem little more than a perverse and distant memory. but before elvis was camp, he was its opposite a genuine cultural force. ... elvis breakthroughs are underappreciated because in this rockandroll age, his hardrocking music and sultry style have triumphed so completely. not only presleys achievements but his failings as well, are seen by some cultural observers as adding to the power of his legacy, as in this description by greil marcus

elvis presley is a supreme figure in american life, one whose presence, no matter how banal or predictable, brooks no real comparisons. ... the cultural range of his music has expanded to the point where it includes not only the hits of the day, but also patriotic recitals, pure country gospel, and really dirty blues. ... elvis has emerged as a great artist, a great rocker, a great purveyor of schlock, a great heart throb, a great bore, a great symbol of potency, a great ham, a great nice person, and, yes, a great american.

having sold about  million records worldwide, presley is one of the bestselling music artists of all time.presley holds the records for most songs charting in billboards top   and top  , according to chart statistician joel whitburn,  according to presley historian adam victor. presleys rankings for top ten and numberone hits vary depending on how the doublesided hound dog/dont be cruel and dont/i beg of you singles, which precede the inception of billboards unified hot  chart, are analyzed. according to whitburns analysis, presley holds the record with , tying with madonna; per billboards current assessment, he ranks second with . whitburn and billboard concur that the beatles hold the record for most numberone hits with , and that mariah carey is second with . whitburn has presley with  billboard has him third with . according to billboard,  presley has  cumulative weeks at number one alone at , according to whitburn and the rock and roll hall of fame, with only mariah carey having more with  weeks. he holds the records for most numberone singles on the uk chart with  and singles reaching the top ten with .as an album artist, presley is credited by billboard with the record for the most albums charting in the billboard  , far ahead of secondplace frank sinatras . he also holds the record for most time spent at number one on the billboard   weeks. in  and , two albums setting presleys vocals against music by the royal philharmonic orchestra, if i can dream and the wonder of you, both reached number one in the uk. this gave him a new record for numberone uk albums by a solo artist with , and extended his record for longest span between numberone albums by anybodypresley had first topped the british chart in  with his selftitled debut.as of , the recording industry association of america  credits presley with . million certified album sales in the us, third all time behind the beatles and garth brooks. he holds the records for most gold albums , and most platinum albums . his  multiplatinum albums is second behind the beatles . his total of  album certification awards , far outpaces the beatles secondbest . he has the thmost gold singles , and the thmost platinum singles .in , the spider paradonea presleyi was named in his honor. in , president donald trump awarded presley the presidential medal of freedom posthumously.

a vast number of recordings have been issued under presleys name. the number of his original master recordings has been variously calculated as  and . his career began and he was most successful during an era when singles were the primary commercial medium for pop music. for his albums, the distinction between official studio records and other forms is often blurred. for most of the s, his recording career focused on soundtrack albums. in the s, his most heavily promoted and bestselling lp releases tended to be concert albums.

films starred

tv concert specialselvis 

aloha from hawaii via satellite 

elvis in concert 

films generate income from several revenue streams, including theatrical exhibition, home video, television broadcast rights, and merchandising. however, theatrical boxoffice earnings are the primary metric for trade publications in assessing the success of a film, mostly because of the availability of the data compared to sales figures for home video and broadcast rights, but also because of historical practice. included on the list are charts of the top boxoffice earners , a chart of highgrossing films by calendar year, a timeline showing the transition of the highestgrossing film record, and a chart of the highestgrossing film franchises and series. all charts are ranked by international theatrical boxoffice performance where possible, excluding income derived from home video, broadcasting rights, and merchandise.

traditionally, war films, musicals, and historical dramas have been the most popular genres, but franchise films have been among the best performers of the st century. there is strong interest in the superhero genre, with ten films in the marvel cinematic universe featuring among the nominal topearners. the most successful superhero film, avengers endgame, is also the secondhighestgrossing film on the nominal earnings chart, and there are four films in total based on the avengers comic books charting in the top twenty. other marvel comics adaptations have also had success with the spiderman and xmen properties, while films based on batman and superman from dc comics have generally performed well. star wars is also represented in the nominal earnings chart with five films, while the jurassic park franchise features prominently. although the nominal earnings chart is dominated by films adapted from preexisting properties and sequels, it is headed by avatar, which is an original work. animated family films have performed consistently well, with disney films enjoying lucrative rereleases prior to the homevideo era. disney also enjoyed later success with films such as frozen and frozen ii, zootopia, and the lion king , as well as its pixar brand, of which incredibles , toy story  and , and finding dory have been the best performers. beyond disney and pixar animation, the despicable me, shrek, and ice age series have met with the most success.

while inflation has eroded the achievements of most films from the s, s, and s, there are franchises originating from that period that are still active. besides the star wars and superman franchises, james bond and godzilla films are still being released periodically; all four are among the highestgrossing franchises. some of the older films that held the record of highestgrossing film still have respectable grosses by todays standards, but no longer compete numerically against todays topearners in an era of much higher individual ticket prices. when those prices are adjusted for inflation, however, then gone with the windwhich was the highestgrossing film outright for twentyfive yearsis still the highestgrossing film of all time. all grosses on the list are expressed in u.s. dollars at their nominal value, except where stated otherwise.

with a worldwide boxoffice gross of over . billion, avatar is proclaimed to be the highestgrossing film, but such claims usually refer to theatrical revenues only and do not take into account home video and television income, which can form a significant portion of a films earnings. once revenue from home entertainment is factored in, it is not immediately clear which film is the most successful. titanic earned . billion from video and dvd sales and rentals, in addition to the . billion it grossed in theatres. while complete sales data are not available for avatar, it earned  million from the sale of sixteen million dvd and bluray units in north america, and ultimately sold a total of thirty million dvd and bluray units worldwide. after home video income is accounted for, both films have earned over  billion each. television broadcast rights will also substantially add to a films earnings, with a film often earning the equivalent of as much as  of its theatrical box office for two television runs, on top of payperview revenues; titanic earned a further  million from the nbc and hbo broadcast rights, equating to about  of its north american gross.

when a film is highly exploitable as a commercial property, its ancillary revenues can dwarf its income from direct film sales. the lion king  earned over  billion in boxoffice and home video sales, but this pales in comparison to the  billion earned at box offices around the world by the stage adaptation. merchandising can be extremely lucrative too the lion king also sold  billion of merchandise, while pixars carswhich earned  million in theatrical revenues and was only a modest hit by comparison to other pixar filmsgenerated global merchandise sales of over  billion in the five years after its  release. pixar had another huge hit with toy story , which generated almost  billion in merchandise retail sales in addition to the  billion it earned at the box office.on this chart, films are ranked by the revenues from theatrical exhibition at their nominal value, along with the highest positions they attained. six films in total have grossed in excess of  billion worldwide, with avatar ranked in the top position. all of the films have had a theatrical run  in the st century, and films that have not played during this period do not appear on the chart because of ticketprice inflation, population size and ticket purchasing trends not being considered.

because of the longterm effects of inflation, notably the significant increase of movie theater ticket prices, the list unadjusted for inflation gives far more weight to later films. the unadjusted list, while commonly found in the press, is therefore largely meaningless for comparing films widely separated in time, as many films from earlier eras will never appear on a modern unadjusted list, despite achieving higher commercial success when adjusted for price increases. to compensate for the devaluation of the currency, some charts make adjustments for inflation, but not even this practice fully addresses the issue, since ticket prices and inflation do not necessarily parallel one another. for example, in , tickets cost . or about . in inflationadjusted  dollars; by , prices had risen to about ., a drop to . in inflationadjusted  dollars. ticket prices have also risen at different rates of inflation around the world, further complicating the process of adjusting worldwide grosses.another complication is release in multiple formats for which different ticket prices are charged. one notable example of this phenomenon is avatar, which was also released in d and imax almost twothirds of tickets for that film were for d showings with an average price of , and about onesixth were for imax showings with an average price over ., compared to a  average price of . for d films. social and economic factors such as population change and the growth of international markets also have an effect on the number of people purchasing theater tickets, along with audience demographics where some films sell a much higher proportion of discounted childrens tickets, or perform better in big cities where tickets cost more.the measuring system for gauging a films success is based on unadjusted grosses, mainly because historically this is the way it has always been done because of the practices of the film industry the boxoffice receipts are compiled by theaters and relayed to the distributor, which in turn releases them to the media. converting to a more representative system that counts ticket sales rather than gross is also fraught with problems because the only data available for older films are the sale totals. as the motion picture industry is highly oriented towards marketing currently released films, unadjusted figures are always used in marketing campaigns so that new blockbuster films can much more easily achieve a high sales ranking, and thus be promoted as a top film of all time, so there is little incentive to switch to a more robust analysis from a marketing or even newsworthy point of view.despite the inherent difficulties in accounting for inflation, several attempts have been made. estimates depend on the price index used to adjust the grosses, and the exchange rates used to convert between currencies can also affect the calculations, both of which can have an effect on the ultimate rankings of an inflation adjusted list. gone with the windfirst released in is generally considered to be the most successful film, with guinness world records in  estimating its adjusted global gross at . billion. estimates for gone with the winds adjusted gross have varied substantially its owner, turner entertainment, estimated its adjusted earnings at . billion in , a few years earlier than the guinness estimate; other estimates fall either side of this amount, with one putting its gross just under  billion in , while another provided an alternative figure of . billion in . which film is gone with the winds nearest rival depends on the set of figures used guinness had avatar in second place with  billion, while other estimates saw titanic in the runnerup spot with firstrun worldwide earnings of almost . billion at  prices.

audience tastes were fairly eclectic during the th century, but several trends did emerge. during the silent era, films with war themes were popular with audiences, with the birth of a nation , the four horsemen of the apocalypse, the big parade and wings  becoming the most successful films in their respective years of release, with the trend coming to an end with all quiet on the western front in . with the advent of sound in , the musicalthe genre best placed to showcase the new technologytook over as the most popular type of film with audiences, with  and  both being topped by musical films. the genre continued to perform strongly in the s, but the outbreak of world war ii saw warthemed films dominate again during this period, starting with gone with the wind  in , and finishing with the best years of our lives  in . samson and delilah  saw the beginning of a trend of increasingly expensive historical dramas set during ancient rome/biblical times throughout the s as cinema competed with television for audiences, with quo vadis, the robe, the ten commandments, benhur and spartacus all becoming the highestgrossing film of the year during initial release, before the genre started to wane after several highprofile failures. the success of white christmas and south pacific in the s foreshadowed the comeback of the musical in the s with west side story, mary poppins, my fair lady, the sound of music and funny girl all among the top films of the decade. the s saw a shift in audience tastes to high concept films, with six such films made by either george lucas or steven spielberg topping the chart during the s. the st century has seen an increasing dependence on franchises and adaptations, with the boxoffice dominance of films based on preexisting intellectual property at record levels.

steven spielberg is the most represented director on the chart, with six films to his credit, occupying the top spot in , , , ,  and . cecil b. demille  is in second place with five films and william wyler  and james cameron  are tied for third place with four films. d. w. griffith , george roy hill  and the russo brothers  all feature heavily with three films apiece. george lucas directed two charttoppers in  and , but also served in a strong creative capacity as a producer and writer in , , ,  and  as well. the following directors have also all directed two films on the chart frank lloyd, king vidor, frank capra, michael curtiz, leo mccarey, alfred hitchcock, david lean, stanley kubrick, guy hamilton, mike nichols, william friedkin, peter jackson, gore verbinski, and michael bay; mervyn leroy, ken annakin and robert wise are each represented by one solo credit and one shared credit, and john ford codirected two films. disney films are usually codirected and some directors have served on several winning teams wilfred jackson, hamilton luske, clyde geronimi, david hand, ben sharpsteen, wolfgang reitherman and bill roberts have all codirected at least two films on the list. only seven directors have topped the chart in consecutive years mccarey , nichols , spielberg , jackson , verbinski  and the russo brothers .

because of release schedulesespecially in the case of films released towards the end of the yearand different release patterns across the world, many films can do business in two or more calendar years; therefore the grosses documented here are not confined to just the year of release. grosses are not limited to original theatrical runs either, with many older films often being rereleased periodically so the figures represent all the business a film has done since its original release; a films firstrun gross is included in brackets after the total if known. because of incomplete data it cannot be known for sure how much money some films have made and when they made it, but generally the chart chronicles the films from each year that went on to earn the most. in the cases where estimates conflict both films are recorded, and in cases where a film has moved into first place because of being rereleased the previous recordholder is also retained.

at least eleven films have held the record of highestgrossing film since the birth of a nation assumed the top spot in . both the birth of a nation and gone with the wind spent twentyfive consecutive years apiece as the highestgrosser, with films directed by steven spielberg and james cameron holding the record on three occasions each. spielberg became the first director to break his own record when jurassic park overtook e.t., and cameron emulated the feat when avatar broke the record set by titanic. when it took over the top spot in , avengers endgame became the first sequel to hold the record of highestgrossing film, and in doing so interrupted thirtysix years of spielberg/cameron dominance before avatar reclaimed the top spot two years later in  upon a rerelease.

some sources claim that the big parade superseded the birth of a nation as highestgrossing film, eventually being replaced by snow white and the seven dwarfs, which in turn was quickly usurped by gone with the wind. exact figures are not known for the birth of a nation, but contemporary records put its worldwide earnings at . million as of . its international release was delayed by world war i, and it was not released in many foreign territories until the s; coupled with further rereleases in the united states, its  million earnings as reported by variety in  are consistent with the earlier figure. at this time, variety still had the birth of a nation ahead of the big parade  on distributor rentals andif its estimate is correctsnow white and the seven dwarfs  would not have earned enough on its first theatrical run to take the record; although it would have been the highestgrossing talkie, displacing the singing fool . although received wisdom holds that it is unlikely the birth of a nation was ever overtaken by a silentera film, the record would fall to s benhur  if the birth of a nation earned significantly less than its estimated gross. in addition to its gross rental earnings through public exhibition, the birth of a nation played at a large number of private, club and organizational engagements which figures are unavailable for. it was hugely popular with the ku klux klan who used it to drive recruitment, and at one point variety estimated its total earnings to stand at around  million. despite later retracting the claim, the sum has been widely reported even though it has never been substantiated. while it is generally accepted that gone with the wind took over the record of highestgrossing film on its initial releasewhich is true in terms of public exhibitionit is likely it did not overtake the birth of a nation in total revenue until a much later date, with it still being reported as the highest earner up until the s. gone with the wind itself may have been briefly overtaken by the ten commandments , which closed at the end of  with worldwide rentals of  million compared to gone with the winds  million; if it did claim the top spot its tenure there was shortlived, since gone with the wind was rereleased the following year and increased its earnings to  million. depending on how accurate the estimates are, the  remake of benhur may also have captured the record from gone with the wind as of the end of  it had earned  million worldwide, and by  it was trailing gone with the wind by just  million with international takings of  million, ultimately earning  million from its initial release.

another film purported to have been the highestgrosser is the  pornographic film deep throat. in , linda lovelace testified to a united states senate judiciary subcommittee on juvenile justice that the film had earned  million; this figure has been the subject of much speculation, since if it is accurate then the film would have made more money than star wars, and finished the s as the highestgrossing film. the main argument against this figure is that it simply did not have a wide enough release to sustain the sort of sums that would be required for it to ultimately gross this amount. exact figures are not known, but testimony in a federal trial in about four years into the films releaseshowed the film had grossed over  million. roger ebert has reasoned it possibly did earn as much as  million on paper, since mobsters owned most of the adult movie theaters during this period and would launder income from drugs and prostitution through them, so probably inflated the boxoffice receipts for the film.the birth of a nation, gone with the wind, the godfather, jaws, star wars, e.t., and avatar all increased their record grosses with rereleases. the grosses from their original theatrical runs are included here along with totals from rereleases up to the point that they lost the record; therefore the total for the birth of a nation includes income from its reissues up to ; the total for star wars includes revenue from the late s and early s reissues but not from the  special edition; the total for e.t. incorporates its gross from the  reissue but not from . the total for avatars first appearance on the chart includes revenue from the  special edition, which represents all of its earnings up to the point it relinquished the record, whereas its second appearance also incorporates revenue from a  rerelease in the asiapacific region as well as the  rerelease in china which helped it to reclaim the record. gone with the wind is likewise represented twice on the chart the  entry includes earnings from its staggered  release  along with all of its revenue up to the  reissue prior to losing the record to the sound of music in ; its  entryafter it took back the recordincludes income from the  and  reissues but omitting later releases. the godfather was rereleased in  after its success at the th academy awards, and jaws was released again in , and their grosses here most likely include earnings from those releases. the sound of music, the godfather, jaws, jurassic park, and titanic increased their earnings with further releases in , , , , and , respectively, but they are not included in the totals here because they had already conceded the record prior to being rereleased.

prior to , only seven film series had grossed over  billion at the box office james bond, star wars, indiana jones, rocky, batman, jurassic park, and star trek. since the turn of the century, that number has increased to over ninety . this is partly due to inflation and market growth, but it is also due to hollywoods adoption of the franchise model films that have builtin brand recognition such as being based on a wellknown literary source or an established character. the methodology is based on the concept that films associated with things audiences are already familiar with can be more effectively marketed to them, and as such are known as presold films within the industry.a franchise is typically defined to be at least two works derived from a common intellectual property. traditionally, the work has a tautological relationship with the property, but this is not a prerequisite. an enduring staple of the franchise model is the concept of the crossover, which can be defined as a story in which characters or concepts from two or more discrete texts or series of texts meet. a consequence of a crossover is that an intellectual property may be utilized by more than one franchise. for example, batman v superman dawn of justice belongs to not only the batman and superman franchises, but also to the dc extended universe, which is a shared universe. a shared universe is a particular type of crossover where a number of characters from a wide range of fictional works wind up sharing a fictional world. the most successful shared universe in the medium of film is the marvel cinematic universe, a crossover between multiple superhero properties owned by marvel comics. the marvel cinematic universe is also the highestgrossing franchise, amassing over  billion at the box office.

the spiderman films are the highestgrossing series based on a single property, earning over . billion at the box office . if ancillary income from merchandise is included, then star wars is the most lucrative property; it holds the guinness world record for the most successful film merchandising franchise and was valued at . billion  in . the marvel cinematic universe has had the most films gross over  billion, with ten. the four avengers films, the two frozen films, and the two avatar films are the only franchises where each installment has grossed over  billion, although the jurassic park and black panther series  have averaged over  billion per film.

singapore , officially the republic of singapore, is an island country and citystate in maritime southeast asia. it is located about one degree of latitude  north of the equator, off the southern tip of the malay peninsula, bordering the strait of malacca to the west, the singapore strait to the south, the south china sea to the east, and the straits of johor to the north. the countrys territory comprises one main island,  satellite islands and islets, and one outlying islet; the combined area of these has increased by approximately  since the countrys independence as a result of extensive land reclamation projects. it has the second highest population density of any country in the world, although there are numerous green and recreational spaces as a result of urban planning. with a multicultural population and in recognition of the cultural identities of the major ethnic groups within the nation, singapore has four official languages english, malay, mandarin, and tamil. english is the lingua franca, with its exclusive use in numerous public services. multiracialism is enshrined in the constitution and continues to shape national policies in education, housing, and politics.

singapores history dates back at least eight hundred years, having been a maritime emporium known as temasek and subsequently a major constituent part of several successive thalassocratic empires. its contemporary era began in , when stamford raffles established singapore as an entrept trading post of the british empire. in , the colonies in southeast asia were reorganised, and singapore came under the direct control of britain as part of the straits settlements. during world war ii, singapore was occupied by japan in  and returned to british control as a separate crown colony following japans surrender in . singapore gained selfgovernance in  and, in , became part of the new federation of malaysia, alongside malaya, north borneo, and sarawak. ideological differences, most notably the perceived encroachment of the egalitarian malaysian malaysia political ideology led by lee kuan yew into the other constituent entities of malaysiaat the perceived expense of the bumiputera and the policies of ketuanan melayueventually led to singapores expulsion from the federation two years later; singapore became an independent sovereign country in .

after early years of turbulence and despite lacking natural resources and a hinterland, the nation rapidly developed to become one of the four asian tigers. with its growth based on international trade and economic globalisation, it integrated itself with the world economy through free trade with minimaltono trade barriers or tariffs, exportoriented industrialisation, and the large accumulation of received foreign direct investments, foreign exchange reserves, and assets held by sovereign wealth funds. as a highly developed country, it has the highest gdp per capita  in the world. identified as a tax haven, singapore is the only country in asia with a aaa sovereign credit rating from all major rating agencies. it is a major aviation, financial, and maritime shipping hub and has consistently been ranked as one of the most expensive cities to live in for expatriates and foreign workers. singapore ranks highly in key social indicators education, healthcare, quality of life, personal safety, infrastructure, and housing, with a homeownership rate of  percent. singaporeans enjoy one of the longest life expectancies, fastest internet connection speeds, lowest infant mortality rates, and lowest levels of corruption in the world.

singapore is a unitary parliamentary republic with a westminster system of unicameral parliamentary government, and its legal system is based on common law. while the country is a multiparty democracy with free elections, the government under the peoples action party  wields significant control and dominance over politics and society. the pap has governed the country continuously since full internal selfgovernment was achieved in , currently holding  out of  elected seats in parliament. one of the five founding members of asean, singapore is also the headquarters of the asiapacific economic cooperation secretariat, the pacific economic cooperation council secretariat, and is the host city of many international conferences and events. singapore is also a member of the united nations, the world trade organization, the east asia summit, the nonaligned movement, and the commonwealth of nations.

the english name of singapore is an anglicisation of the native malay name for the country, singapura , which was in turn derived from the sanskrit word for lion city . pulau ujong was one of the earliest references to singapore island, which corresponds to a chinese account from the third century referred to a place as p lu zhng , a transcription of the malay name for island at the end of a peninsula. early references to the name temasek  are found in the nagarakretagama, a javanese eulogy written in , and a vietnamese source from the same time period. the name possibly means sea town, being derived from the malay tasek, meaning sea or lake. the chinese traveller wang dayuan visited a place around  named danmaxi  or tam ma siak, depending on pronunciation; this may be a transcription of temasek, alternatively, it may be a combination of the malay tanah meaning land and chinese xi meaning tin, which was traded on the island.variations of the name sihapura were used for a number of cities throughout the region prior to the establishment of the kingdom of singapura. in hindubuddhist culture, lions were associated with power and protection, which may explain the attraction of such a name. the name singapura supplanted temasek sometime before the th century, after the establishment of the kingdom of singapura on the island by a fleeing sumatran raja  from palembang. however, the precise time and reason for the name change is unknown. the semihistorical malay annals state that temasek was christened singapura by sang nila utama, a thcentury sumatran raja from palembang. the annals state that sang nila utama encountered a strange beast on the island that he took to be a lion. seeing this as an omen, he established the town of singapura where he encountered the beast., the second hypothesis, drawn from portuguese sources, postulates that this mythical story is based on the real life parameswara of palembang. parameswara declared independence from majapahit and mounted a lion throne. after then being driven into exile by the javanese, he usurped control over temasek. it is possible that he rechristened the area as singapura, recalling the throne he had been driven from.under japanese occupation, singapore was renamed syonan , meaning light of the south. singapore is sometimes referred to by the nickname the garden city, in reference to its parks and treelined streets. another informal name, the little red dot, was adopted after an article in the asian wall street journal of  august  said that indonesian president b. j. habibie referred to singapore as a red dot on a map.

in , according to the malay annals, the kingdom of singapura was founded on the island by sang nila utama. although the historicity of the accounts as given in the malay annals is the subject of academic debates, it is nevertheless known from various documents that singapore in the th century, then known as temasek, was a trading port under the influence of both the majapahit empire and the siamese kingdoms, and was a part of the indosphere. these indianised kingdoms were characterised by surprising resilience, political integrity and administrative stability. historical sources also indicate that around the end of the th century, its ruler parameswara was attacked by either the majapahit or the siamese, forcing him to move to malacca where he founded the sultanate of malacca. archaeological evidence suggests that the main settlement on fort canning was abandoned around this time, although a small trading settlement continued in singapore for some time afterwards. in , portuguese raiders burned down the settlement, and the island faded into obscurity for the next two centuries. by then, singapore was nominally part of the johor sultanate. the wider maritime region and much trade was under dutch control for the following period after the dutch conquest of malacca.

the british governor stamford raffles arrived in singapore on  january  and soon recognised the island as a natural choice for the new port. the island was then nominally ruled by tengku abdul rahman, the sultan of johor, who was controlled by the dutch and the bugis. however, the sultanate was weakened by factional division abdul rahman, the temenggong of johor to tengku abdul rahman, as well as his officials, were loyal to the sultans elder brother tengku long, who was living in exile in penyengat island, riau islands. with the temenggongs help, raffles managed to smuggle tengku long back into singapore. raffles offered to recognise tengku long as the rightful sultan of johor, under the title of sultan hussein, as well as provide him with a yearly payment of  and another  to the temenggong; in return, sultan hussein would grant the british the right to establish a trading post on singapore. the treaty of singapore was signed on  february .

in , a further treaty with the sultan led to the entire island becoming a british possession. in , singapore became part of the straits settlements, then under the jurisdiction of british india. singapore became the regional capital in . prior to raffles arrival, there were only about a thousand people living on the island, mostly indigenous malays along with a handful of chinese. by  the population had swelled to over ,, more than half being chinese. many of these early immigrants came to work on the pepper and gambier plantations. in , the straits settlements were separated from british india, coming under the direct control of britain. later, in the s, when the rubber industry became established in malaya and singapore, the island became a global centre for rubber sorting and export.

singapore was not greatly affected by the first world war , as the conflict did not spread to southeast asia. the only significant event during the war was the  singapore mutiny by muslim sepoys from british india, who were garrisoned in singapore. after hearing rumours that they were to be sent to fight the ottoman empire, a muslim state, the soldiers rebelled, killing their officers and several british civilians before the mutiny was suppressed by nonmuslim troops arriving from johore and burma.after world war i, the british built the large singapore naval base as part of the defensive singapore strategy. originally announced in , the construction of the base proceeded at a slow pace until the japanese invasion of manchuria in . costing  million and not fully completed in , it was nonetheless the largest dry dock in the world, the thirdlargest floating dock, and had enough fuel tanks to support the entire british navy for six months. the base was defended by heavy inch  naval guns stationed at fort siloso, fort canning and labrador, as well as a royal air force airfield at tengah air base. winston churchill touted it as the gibraltar of the east, and military discussions often referred to the base as simply east of suez. however, the british home fleet was stationed in europe, and the british could not afford to build a second fleet to protect their interests in asia. the plan was for the home fleet to sail quickly to singapore in the event of an emergency. as a consequence, after world war ii broke out in , the fleet was fully occupied with defending britain, leaving singapore vulnerable to japanese invasion.

during the pacific war, the japanese invasion of malaya culminated in the battle of singapore. when the british force of , troops surrendered on  february , british prime minister winston churchill called the defeat the worst disaster and largest capitulation in british history. british and empire losses during the fighting for singapore were heavy, with a total of nearly , personnel captured. about , were killed or wounded, of which australians made up the majority. japanese casualties during the fighting in singapore amounted to , killed and , wounded. the occupation was to become a major turning point in the histories of several nations, including those of japan, britain, and singapore. japanese newspapers triumphantly declared the victory as deciding the general situation of the war. between , and , ethnic chinese people were killed in the subsequent sook ching massacre. british forces had planned to liberate singapore in ; however, the war ended before these operations could be carried out.

after the japanese surrender to the allies on  august , singapore fell into a brief state of violence and disorder; looting and revengekilling were widespread. british, australian, and indian troops led by lord louis mountbatten returned to singapore to receive the formal surrender of japanese forces in the region from general seishir itagaki on behalf of general hisaichi terauchi on  september . meanwhile, tomoyuki yamashita was tried by a us military commission for war crimes, but not for crimes committed by his troops in malaya or singapore. he was convicted and hanged in the philippines on  february .much of singapores infrastructure had been destroyed during the war, including those needed to supply utilities. a shortage of food led to malnutrition, disease, and rampant crime and violence. a series of strikes in  caused massive stoppages in public transport and other services. however, by late  the economy began to recover, facilitated by a growing international demand for tin and rubber. the failure of britain to successfully defend its colony against the japanese changed its image in the eyes of singaporeans. british military administration ended on  april , and singapore became a separate crown colony. in july , separate executive and legislative councils were established and the election of six members of the legislative council was scheduled for the following year.during the s, chinese communists, with strong ties to the trade unions and chinese schools, waged a guerrilla war against the government, leading to the malayan emergency. the  national service riots, hock lee bus riots, and chinese middle schools riots in singapore were all linked to these events. david marshall, proindependence leader of the labour front, won singapores first general election in . he led a delegation to london, and britain rejected his demand for complete selfrule. he resigned and was replaced by lim yew hock in , and after further negotiations britain agreed to grant singapore full internal selfgovernment for all matters except defence and foreign affairs. during the subsequent may  elections, the peoples action party  won a landslide victory. governor sir william allmond codrington goode served as the first yang dipertuan negara .

pap leaders believed that singapores future lay with malaya, due to strong ties between the two. it was thought that reuniting with malaya would benefit the economy by creating a common market, alleviating ongoing unemployment woes in singapore. however, a sizeable procommunist wing of the pap was strongly opposed to the merger, fearing a loss of influence, and hence formed the barisan sosialis, splitting from the pap. the ruling party of malaya, united malays national organisation , was staunchly anticommunist, and it was suspected umno would support the noncommunist factions of pap. umno, initially sceptical of the idea of a merger due to distrust of the pap government and concern that the large ethnic chinese population in singapore would alter the racial balance in malaya on which their political power base depended, became supportive of the idea of the merger due to joint fear of a communist takeover.on  may , malayas prime minister, tunku abdul rahman, made a surprise proposal for a new federation called malaysia, which would unite the current and former british possessions in the region the federation of malaya, singapore, brunei, north borneo, and sarawak. umno leaders believed that the additional malay population in the bornean territories would balance singapores chinese population. the british government, for its part, believed that the merger would prevent singapore from becoming a haven for communism. to obtain a mandate for a merger, the pap held a referendum on the merger. this referendum included a choice of different terms for a merger with malaysia and had no option for avoiding merger altogether. on  september , singapore joined with malaya, the north borneo, and sarawak to form the new federation of malaysia under the terms of the malaysia agreement. under this agreement, singapore had a relatively high level of autonomy compared to the other states of malaysia.indonesia opposed the formation of malaysia due to its own claims over borneo and launched konfrontasi  in response to the formation of malaysia. on  march , a bomb planted by indonesian saboteurs on a mezzanine floor of macdonald house exploded, killing three people and injuring  others. it was the deadliest of at least  bomb incidents which occurred during the confrontation. two members of the indonesian marine corps, osman bin haji mohamed ali and harun bin said, were eventually convicted and executed for the crime. the explosion caused us,  in damages to macdonald house.even after the merger, the singaporean government and the malaysian central government disagreed on many political and economic issues. despite an agreement to establish a common market, singapore continued to face restrictions when trading with the rest of malaysia. in retaliation, singapore did not extend to sabah and sarawak the full extent of the loans agreed to for economic development of the two eastern states. talks soon broke down, and abusive speeches and writing became rife on both sides. this led to communal strife in singapore, culminating in the  race riots. on  august , malaysian prime minister tunku abdul rahman, seeing no alternative to avoid further bloodshed  advised the parliament of malaysia that it should vote to expel singapore from malaysia. on  august , the malaysian parliament voted  to  to move a bill to amend the constitution, expelling singapore from malaysia, which left singapore as a newly independent country.

after being expelled from malaysia, singapore became independent as the republic of singapore on  august , with lee kuan yew and yusof bin ishak as the first prime minister and president respectively. in , the country cofounded the association of southeast asian nations . race riots broke out once more in . lee kuan yews emphasis on rapid economic growth, support for business entrepreneurship, and limitations on internal democracy shaped singapores policies for the next halfcentury. economic growth continued throughout the s, with the unemployment rate falling to  and real gdp growth averaging at about  up until . during the s, singapore began to shift towards hightech industries, such as the wafer fabrication sector, in order to remain competitive as neighbouring countries began manufacturing with cheaper labour. singapore changi airport was opened in  and singapore airlines was formed. the port of singapore became one of the worlds busiest ports and the service and tourism industries also grew immensely during this period.the pap has remained in power since independence. some activists and opposition politicians see the governments strict regulation of political and media activities as an infringement on political rights. in response, singapore has seen several significant political changes, such as the introduction of the nonconstituency members of parliament in  to allow up to three losing candidates from opposition parties to be appointed as mps. group representation constituencies  were introduced in  to create multiseat electoral divisions, intended to ensure minority representation in parliament. nominated members of parliament were introduced in  to allow nonelected nonpartisan mps. the constitution was amended in  to provide for an elected president who has veto power in the use of past reserves and appointments to certain public offices.in , goh chok tong succeeded lee and became singapores second prime minister. during gohs tenure, the country went through the  asian financial crisis and the  sars outbreak. in , lee hsien loong, the eldest son of lee kuan yew, became the countrys third prime minister. lee hsien loongs tenure included the  global financial crisis, the resolution of a dispute over land ownership at tanjong pagar railway station between singapore and malaysia, and the introduction of the two integrated resorts , located at the marina bay sands and resorts world sentosa. the pap suffered its worst ever electoral results in , winning just  of votes, amidst debate over issues including the influx of foreign workers and the high cost of living. on  march , lee kuan yew died, and a oneweek period of public mourning was observed nationwide. subsequently, the pap regained its dominance in parliament through the september general election, receiving . of the popular vote, although this remained lower than the  tally of . and the  tally of .. the  election held in july saw the pap drop to  of the vote, while the workers party took  of the  seats, the highest number ever won by another party.

singapore is a parliamentary republic based on the westminster system. the constitution of singapore is the supreme law of the country, establishing the structure and responsibility of governance. the president is the head of state. the governance of singapore is separated into three branches

executive the executive consists of the cabinet, led by the prime minister, and the attorney generals chambers led by the attorneygeneral. the cabinet is collectively responsible for all government policies and the daytoday administration of the affairs of state. it is typically composed of members of the singapore parliament. the prime minister is appointed by the president, and the ministers in the cabinet and the attorneygeneral are appointed by the president, acting on the advice and consent of the prime minister. the prime minister is the effective head of the executive branch of government.legislature the singapore parliament is unicameral and, together with the president, comprises the legislature. members of parliament  consist of elected, nonconstituency, and nominated members. the majority of mps are elected into parliament at a general election. the singapore parliament is collectively responsible for enacting the laws governing the state. the president holds limited discretionary powers of oversight over the government. the presidents veto powers are further subject to parliamentary overruling.judiciary the judiciarys function is to independently administer justice and is headed by the chief justice. the judges and judicial commissioners are appointed by the president on the advice of the prime minister. the supreme court and state courts adjudicates in civil disputes between persons, convicts or acquits accused persons in criminal prosecutions, and interprets laws to decide on its constitutionality. any law or provision of a law found to be unconstitutional can be struck down by the supreme court.the president is directly elected by popular vote for a renewable sixyear term. requirements for this position, which were enacted by the pap government, are extremely stringent, such that only a handful of people qualify for the candidacy. these qualifications include that a candidate needs to be a person at least  years of age who is no longer a member of a political party, to either have held public office for at least  years in a number of specific public service leadership roles, or to have  years experience as chief executive of a fully profitable private sector company with at least s million in shareholders equity, be a resident in singapore for at least  years, not have a criminal record, and more. candidates must also satisfy the presidential elections committee  that he or she is a person of integrity, good character and reputation.

the constitution requires that presidential elections be reserved for a racial community if no one from that ethnic group has been elected to the presidency in the five most recent terms. only members of that community may qualify as candidates in a reserved presidential election. in the  presidential election, this combination of stringent requirements and a reserved election that required the candidate to be of the  malay ethnic group led to the pec approving a single candidate for the presidency; halimah yacob, considered part of the malay community, won in an uncontested election. she also became singapores first female president.

members of parliament  are elected at least every five years . the th and current parliament has  members;  were directly elected from the  constituencies, nine are nonpartisan nominated members appointed by the president, and three are nonconstituency members from opposition parties who were not elected in the last general election but appointed to the legislature to increase opposition party representation. in group representation constituencies , political parties assemble teams of candidates to contest elections. at least one mp in a grc must be of an ethnic minority background. all elections are held using firstpastthepost voting. mps host weekly political surgeries, called meetthepeople sessions, where they help constituents resolve personal issues which can be related to housing, financial assistance, and immigration.the peoples action party occupies a dominant position in singaporean politics, having won large parliamentary majorities in every election since selfgovernance was granted in . the pap, selfdescribed as pragmatic, have a syncretic ideology combining freemarket principles, civil nationalism, and welfarism. despite promulgating restrictions on civil liberties, singapore under the pap has seen consistent economic growth and political stability. the most represented and popular opposition party is the workers party.the judicial system is based on english common law, continuing the legal tradition established during british rule and with substantial local differences. criminal law is based on the indian penal code originally intended for british india, and was at the time as a crown colony also adopted by the british colonial authorities in singapore and remains the basis of the criminal code in the country with a few exceptions, amendments and repeals since it came into force. trial by jury was abolished in . both corporal punishment  and capital punishment  are legal penalties.the right to freedom of speech and association is guaranteed by article  of the constitution of singapore, although there are provisions in the subsequent subsection that regulate them. the government has restricted freedom of speech and freedom of the press as well as some civil and political rights. in , singapore was ranked th out of  nations by reporters without borders on the global press freedom index. freedom house ranks singapore as partly free in its freedom in the world report, and the economist intelligence unit ranks singapore as a flawed democracy, the second freest rank of four, in its democracy index. all public gatherings of five or more people require police permits, and protests may legally be held only at the speakers corner.in the corruption perceptions index, which ranks countries by perceived levels of public sector corruption, singapore has consistently ranked as one of the least corrupt countries in the world. singapores unique combination of a strong, almost authoritarian, government with an emphasis on meritocracy and good governance is known as the singapore model, and is regarded as a key factor behind singapores political stability, economic growth, and harmonious social order. in , the world justice projects rule of law index ranked singapore as th overall among the worlds  countries for adherence to the rule of law. singapore ranked high on the factors of order and security , absence of corruption , regulatory enforcement , civil justice , and criminal justice , and ranked significantly lower on factors of open government , constraints on government powers , and fundamental rights .

singapores stated foreign policy priority is maintaining security in southeast asia and surrounding territories. an underlying principle is political and economic stability in the region. it has diplomatic relations with more than  sovereign states.as one of the five founding members of asean, singapore is a strong supporter of the asean free trade area  and the asean investment area ; it is also the host of the apec secretariat. singapore maintains membership in other regional organisations, such as asiaeurope meeting, the forum for east asialatin american cooperation, the indian ocean rim association, and the east asia summit. it is also a member of the nonaligned movement, the united nations and the commonwealth. while singapore is not a formal member of the g, it has been invited to participate in g processes in most years since . singapore is also the location of the pacific economic cooperation council  secretariat.in general, bilateral relations with other asean members are strong; however, disagreements have arisen, and relations with neighbouring malaysia and indonesia have sometimes been strained. malaysia and singapore have clashed over the delivery of fresh water to singapore, and access by the singapore armed forces to malaysian airspace. border issues exist with malaysia and indonesia, and both have banned the sale of marine sand to singapore over disputes about singapores land reclamation. some previous disputes, such as the pedra branca dispute, have been resolved by the international court of justice. piracy in the strait of malacca has been a cause of concern for all three countries. close economic ties exist with brunei, and the two share a pegged currency value, through a currency interchangeability agreement between the two countries which makes both brunei dollar and singapore dollar banknotes and coins legal tender in either country.the first diplomatic contact with china was made in the s, with full diplomatic relations established in the s. china has been singapores largest trading partner since , after surpassing malaysia. singapore and the united states share a longstanding close relationship, in particular in defence, the economy, health, and education. singapore has also increased cooperation with asean members and china to strengthen regional security and fight terrorism, and participated in aseans first joint maritime exercise with china in . it has also given support to the usled coalition to fight terrorism, with bilateral cooperation in counterterrorism and counterproliferation initiatives, and joint military exercises.as singapore has diplomatic relations with both the united states and north korea, and was one of the few countries that have relationships with both countries, in june , it hosted a historic summit between us president donald trump and north korean leader kim jongun, the firstever meeting between the sitting leaders of the two nations. it also hosted the maxi meeting in , the first meeting between the political leaders of the two sides of the taiwan strait since the end of the chinese civil war in .

the singaporean military, arguably the most technologically advanced in southeast asia, consists of the army, the navy, the air force and the digital and intelligence service. it is seen as the guarantor of the countrys independence, translating into singapore culture, involving all citizens in the countrys defence. the government spends . of the countrys gdp on the militaryhigh by regional standardsand one out of every four dollars of government spending is spent on defence.after its independence, singapore had only two infantry regiments commanded by british officers. considered too small to provide effective security for the new country, the development of its military forces became a priority. in addition, in october , britain pulled its military out of singapore, leaving behind only a small british, australian and new zealand force as a token military presence. a great deal of initial support came from israel, a country unrecognised by singapores neighbouring muslimmajority nations of malaysia and indonesia. the israel defense forces  commanders were tasked by the singapore government to create the singapore armed forces  from scratch, and israeli instructors were brought in to train singaporean soldiers. military courses were conducted according to the idfs format, and singapore adopted a system of conscription and reserve service based on the israeli model. singapore still maintains strong security ties with israel and is one of the biggest buyers of israeli arms and weapons systems, with one recent example being the matador antitank weapon.the saf is being developed to respond to a wide range of issues in both conventional and unconventional warfare. the defence science and technology agency  is responsible for procuring resources for the military. the geographic restrictions of singapore mean that the saf must plan to fully repulse an attack, as they cannot fall back and regroup. the small size of the population has also affected the way the saf has been designed, with a small active force and a large number of reserves.

singapore has conscription for all ablebodied males at age , except those with a criminal record or who can prove that their loss would bring hardship to their families. males who have yet to complete preuniversity education, are awarded the public service commission  scholarship, or are pursuing a local medical degree can opt to defer their draft. though not required to perform military service, the number of women in the saf has been increasing since  they have been allowed to fill military vocations formerly reserved for men. before induction into a specific branch of the armed forces, recruits undergo at least nine weeks of basic military training.because of the scarcity of open land on the main island, training involving activities such as live firing and amphibious warfare are often carried out on smaller islands, typically barred to civilian access. however, largescale drills, considered too dangerous to be performed in the country, have been performed in other countries such as brunei, indonesia, thailand and the united states. in general, military exercises are held with foreign forces once or twice per week. due to airspace and land constraints, the republic of singapore air force  maintains a number of overseas bases in australia, the united states, and france. the rsafs  squadron is based in raaf base pearce, western australia, and its  squadron is based in the oakey army aviation centre, queensland. the rsaf has one squadronthe  squadronbased in cazaux air base in southern france. the rsafs overseas detachments in the united states are luke air force base in arizona, marana in arizona, mountain home air force base in idaho, and andersen air force base in guam.the saf has sent forces to assist in operations outside the country, in areas such as iraq, and afghanistan, in both military and civilian roles. in the region, they have helped to stabilise east timor and have provided aid to aceh in indonesia following the  indian ocean earthquake and tsunami. since , the republic of singapore navy  has deployed ships to the gulf of aden to aid in countering piracy efforts as part of task force . the saf also helped in relief efforts during hurricane katrina, and typhoon haiyan. singapore is part of the five power defence arrangements , a military alliance with australia, malaysia, new zealand, and the united kingdom. in , singapore was ranked the th most peaceful country on the global peace index.

capital punishment is a legal and enforced penalty in singapore. the country is one of four in the developed world to retain the death penalty, along with the united states, japan and taiwan. particularly, its use against drug trafficking has been a source of contention with various nongovernmental organisations, regarded by some as a victimless crime. the government has responded that it has no doubts that it is the right policy and that there is clear evidence of serious deterrence, and that the law should be looked at upon in the wider context of saving lives, particularly citizens. in , amnesty international claimed that some legal provisions of the singapore system for the death penalty conflict with the right to be presumed innocent until proven guilty. the government has disputed amnestys claims, stating that their position on abolition of the death penalty is by no means uncontested internationally and that the report contains grave errors of facts and misrepresentations.from  to , sexual relations between men were technically illegal under section a of the penal code, first introduced during british colonial rule. during the last few decades, the law was unenforced and pressure to repeal this law increased as homosexuality became more understood. meanwhile, sexual relations between women had always been legal. in , prime minister lee hsien loong announced that singapore would scrap a for good, effectively decriminalising homosexual behaviour. nevertheless, he added that the repeal will not affect the recognition of traditional familial and societal norms, including how marriage is definedputting the legalisation of samesex marriage on the backburner at least for now, although the possibility of civil unions was not officially ruled out. he added this was a compromise between the conservative  and progressive elements of singaporean society to prevent fracturing it.pink dot sg, an event held in support of the lgbt community, has drawn thousands of people annually since  with increasing attendance. according to a survey conducted by the institute of policy studies in , singaporean society has become more liberal on lgbt rights. in the survey, more than  of people said that sexual relations between adults of the same sex were not wrong at all or not wrong most of the time, up from  in . the survey found that  felt the same way about samesex marriage  and  did so about samesex couples adopting a child . in ,  singaporeans protested for improved trans protections in the educational system outside the ministry of education headquarters at buona vista.pimps often traffic women from neighbouring countries such as china, malaysia and vietnam at their brothels as well as rented apartments and hostels for higher profit margins when they get a cut from customers. in response, amendments were made to the womens charter by the government in  to legislate more serious punishments for traffickers, including imprisonment of up to seven years and a fine of s,.

singapore has a highly developed market economy, based historically on extended entrept trade. along with hong kong, south korea, and taiwan, singapore is one of the four asian tigers, and has surpassed its peers in terms of gross domestic product  per capita. between  and , growth rates averaged around  per cent per annum, transforming the living standards of the population.the singaporean economy is regarded as free, innovative,

dynamic and businessfriendly. for several years, singapore has been one of the few countries with an aaa credit rating from the big three, and the only asian country to achieve this rating. singapore attracts a large amount of foreign investment as a result of its location, skilled workforce, low tax rates, advanced infrastructure and zerotolerance against corruption. it was the worlds th most competitive economy in , according to the international institute for management developments world competitiveness ranking of  countries, with the  highest gdp  per capita. roughly  percent of the singaporean workforce is made up of nonsingaporeans. despite market freedom, singapores government operations have a significant stake in the economy, contributing  of the gdp. the city is a popular location for conferences and events.

the currency of singapore is the singapore dollar , issued by the monetary authority of singapore . it has been interchangeable with the brunei dollar at par value since . mas manages its monetary policy by allowing the singapore dollar exchange rate to rise or fall within an undisclosed trading band. this is different from most central banks, which use interest rates to manage policy. singapore has the worlds eleventh largest foreign reserves, and one of the highest net international investment position per capita.singapore has been identified as a tax haven for the wealthy due to its low tax rates on personal income and tax exemptions on foreignbased income and capital gains. individuals such as australian millionaire retailer brett blundy and multibillionaire facebook cofounder eduardo saverin are two examples of wealthy individuals who have settled in singapore. in , singapore was removed from the organisation for economic cooperation and development  liste grise of tax havens, and ranked fourth on the tax justice networks  financial secrecy index of the worlds offshore financial service providers, banking oneeighth of the worlds offshore capital, while providing numerous tax avoidance and evasion opportunities. in august , the straits times reported that indonesia had decided to create tax havens on two islands near singapore to bring indonesian capital back into the tax base. in october , the monetary authority of singapore admonished and fined ubs and dbs and withdrew falcon private banks banking licence for their alleged role in the malaysian sovereign fund scandal.in , singapore was rated the worlds most expensive city for the third consecutive year by the economist intelligence unit, and this remained true in . the government provides numerous assistance programmes to the homeless and needy through the ministry of social and family development, so acute poverty is rare. some of the programmes include providing financial assistance to needy households, providing free medical care at government hospitals, and paying for childrens tuition. other benefits include compensation for gym fees to encourage citizens to exercise, up to s, as a baby bonus for each citizen, heavily subsidised healthcare, financial aid for the disabled, the provision of reducedcost laptops for poor students, rebates for costs such as public transport and utility bills, and more. as of  singapores ranking in the human development index is th in the world, with an hdi value of ..

singapore consists of  islands, including the main island, pulau ujong. there are two manmade connections to johor, malaysia the johorsingapore causeway in the north and the tuas second link in the west. jurong island, pulau tekong, pulau ubin and sentosa are the largest of singapores smaller islands. the highest natural point is bukit timah hill at . m . under british rule, christmas island and the cocos islands were part of singapore, and both were transferred to australia in . pedra branca is the nations easternmost point.land reclamation projects have increased singapores land area from  km  in the s to  km  by , an increase of some  . the country is projected to reclaim another  km . some projects involve merging smaller islands through land reclamation to form larger, more functional and habitable islands, as has been done with jurong island. the type of sand used in reclamation is found in rivers and beaches, rather than deserts, and is in great demand worldwide. in  singapore imported almost  million tons of sand for its projects, the demand being such that indonesia, malaysia, and vietnam have all restricted or barred the export of sand to singapore in recent years. as a result, in  singapore switched to using polders for reclamation, in which an area is enclosed and then pumped dry.

singapores urbanisation means that it has lost  of its historical forests, and now over half of the naturally occurring fauna and flora in singapore is present in nature reserves, such as the bukit timah nature reserve and the sungei buloh wetland reserve, which comprise only . of singapores land area. in , to combat this decline in natural space, the government introduced the vision of making singapore a garden city, aiming to improve quality of life. since then, nearly  of singapores land has been set aside for parks and nature reserves. the government has created plans to preserve the countrys remaining wildlife. singapores well known gardens include the singapore botanic gardens, a yearold tropical garden and singapores first unesco world heritage site.

singapore has a tropical rainforest climate  with no distinctive seasons, uniform temperature and pressure, high humidity, and abundant rainfall. temperatures usually range from  to  c . while temperature does not vary greatly throughout the year, there is a wetter monsoon season from november to february.from july to october, there is often haze caused by bush fires in neighbouring indonesia, usually from the island of sumatra. singapore follows the gmt time zone, one hour ahead of the typical zone for its geographical location. this causes the sun to rise and set particularly late during february, where the sun rises at  am and sets around  pm. during july, the sun sets at around  pm. the earliest the sun rises and sets is in late october and early november when the sun rises at  am and sets at  pm.singapore recognises that climate change and rising sea levels in the decades ahead will have major implications for its lowlying coastline. it estimates that the nation will need to spend  billion over the course of the next century to address the issue. in its  budget, the government set aside an initial  billion towards a coastline and flood protection fund. singapore is the first country in southeast asia to levy a carbon tax on its largest carbonemitting corporations producing more than , tons of carbon dioxide per year, at  per ton.to reduce the countrys dependence on fossil fuels, it has ramped up deployment of solar panels on rooftops and vertical surfaces of buildings, and other initiatives like building one of the worlds largest floating solar farms at tengeh reservoir in tuas.

singapore considers water a national security issue and the government has sought to emphasise conservation. water access is universal and of high quality, though the country is projected to face significant waterstress by . to circumvent this, the public utilities board has implemented the four national taps strategy  water imported from neighbouring malaysia, urban rainwater catchments, reclaimed water  and seawater desalination. singapores approach does not rely only on physical infrastructure; it also emphasises proper legislation and enforcement, water pricing, public education as well as research and development. singapore has declared that it will be water selfsufficient by the time its  longterm water supply agreement with malaysia expires in . however, according to official forecasts, water demand in singapore is expected to double from  to  million us gallons  per day between  and . the increase is expected to come primarily from nondomestic water use, which accounted for  of water demand in  and is expected to account for  of demand in . by that time, water demand is expected to be met by reclaimed water at the tune of  and by desalination accounting for , compared to only  supplied by internal catchments.singapore is expanding its recycling system and intends to spend . billion  in water treatment infrastructure upgrades. the ulu pandan wastewater treatment was specially built to test advanced usedwater treatment processes before full deployment and won the water/wastewater project of the year award at the  global water awards in paris, france. operation started in  and was jointly developed by pub and the black  veatch  aecom joint venture.

singapore has a road system covering , kilometres , which includes  kilometres  of expressways. the singapore area licensing scheme, implemented in , became the worlds first congestion pricing scheme, and included other complementary measures such as stringent car ownership quotas and improvements in mass transit. upgraded in  and renamed electronic road pricing , the system introduced electronic toll collection, electronic detection, and video surveillance technology. a satellitebased system was due to replace the physical gantries by , but has been delayed until  due to global shortages in the supply of semiconductors. as singapore is a small island with a high population density, the number of private cars on the road is restricted with a preset car population quota, to curb pollution and congestion. car buyers must pay for additional registration fees  duties of either , ,  or  of the vehicles open market value , and bid for a singaporean certificate of entitlement  , which allows the car to be driven on the road for maximum period of  years. car prices are generally significantly higher in singapore than in other englishspeaking countries. as with most commonwealth countries, vehicles on the road and people walking on the streets keep to the left .singapores public transport network is shaped up with trains , buses and taxis. there are currently six mrt lines , three lrt lines serving the neighbourhoods of bukit panjang and choa chu kang , sengkang  and punggol , and more than  bus routes in operation. taxis are a popular form of transport as the fares are relatively affordable when compared to many other developed countries, whilst cars in singapore are the most expensive to own worldwide.the johorsingapore causeway  is the busiest international land border crossing in the world, whereby approximately , travellers cross the border checkpoints of both woodlands checkpoint and sultan iskandar building daily .the land transport authority  is responsible for all land transportrelated infrastructure and operations in singapore.

singapore is a major international transport hub in asia, serving some of the busiest sea and air trade routes. changi airport is an aviation centre for southeast asia and a stopover on qantas kangaroo route between sydney and london. there are two civilian airports in singapore, singapore changi airport and seletar airport. singapore changi airport hosts a network of over  airlines connecting singapore to some  cities in about  countries and territories worldwide. it has been rated one of the best international airports by international travel magazines, including being rated as the worlds best airport for the first time in  by skytrax. singapore changi airport also had the second and thirdbusiest international air routes in the world; the jakartasingapore airport pair had . million passengers carried in , whilst the singaporekuala lumpur airport pair had . million passengers carried in , both trailing only behind hong kongtaipei .

singapore airlines, which is the flag carrier of singapore, has been regarded as a star airline by skytrax and been in the world top  list of airlines for multiple consecutive years. changi airport had also been rated as the worlds best airport from  to  before being superseded by hamad international airport in doha; it reclaimed this title in .

the port of singapore, managed by port operators psa international and jurong port, was the worlds secondbusiest port in  in terms of shipping tonnage handled, at . billion gross tons , and in terms of containerised traffic, at . million twentyfoot equivalent units . it is also the worlds secondbusiest, behind shanghai, in terms of cargo tonnage with  million tons handled. in addition, the port is the worlds busiest for transshipment traffic and the worlds biggest ship refuelling centre.

singapore is the worlds rdlargest foreign exchange centre, thlargest financial centre, ndlargest casino gambling market, rdlargest oilrefining and trading centre, largest oilrig producer and hub for ship repair services, and largest logistics hub. the economy is diversified, with its top contributors being financial services, manufacturing, and oilrefining. its main exports are refined petroleum, integrated circuits, and computers, which constituted  of the countrys gdp in . other significant sectors include electronics, chemicals, mechanical engineering, and biomedical sciences. singapore was ranked th in the global innovation index in  and th in . in , there were more than  semiconductor companies in singapore, which together constituted  of the global market share. the semiconductor industry alone contributes around  of singapores gdp.singapores largest companies are in the telecommunications, banking, transportation, and manufacturing sectors, many of which started as staterun statutory corporations and have since been publicly listed on the singapore exchange. such companies include singapore telecommunications , singapore technologies engineering, keppel corporation, overseachinese banking corporation , development bank of singapore , and united overseas bank . in , amidst the global financial crisis, ocbc, dbs and uob were ranked by bloomberg businessweek as the worlds st, th, and th strongest banks in the world, respectively. it is home to the headquarters of  fortune global  companies, the highest in the region.the nations best known global companies include singapore airlines, changi airport, and the port of singapore, all of which are among the mostawarded in their respective fields. singapore airlines was ranked as asias mostadmired company, and the worlds th mostadmired company in  by fortunes annual  most admired companies in the world industry surveys. other awards it has received include the usbased travel  leisures best international airline award, which it has won for  consecutive years. changi airport connects over  airlines to more than  cities. the strategic international air hub has more than  worlds best airport awards as of , and is known as the mostawarded airport in the world. over ten freetrade agreements have been signed with other countries and regions. singapore is the secondlargest foreign investor in india. it is the th largest exporter and the th largest importer in the world.

tourism is a major industry and contributor to the singaporean economy, attracting . million international tourists in , more than three times singapores total population. singapore is the th most visited city in the world, and nd in the asiapacific. in  tourism contributed directly to about  of singapores gdp, down from , when tourism contributed, directly and indirectly, to around . of singapores gdp. altogether, the sector generated approximately . of singapores employment in .in , lonely planet and the new york times listed singapore as their top and thbest world destinations to visit, respectively. wellknown landmarks include the merlion, the esplanade, marina bay sands, gardens by the bay, jewel changi airport, chijmes, national gallery singapore, the singapore flyer, the orchard road shopping belt, the resort island of sentosa, and the singapore botanic gardens, singapores first unesco world heritage site.

the singapore tourism board  is the statutory board under the ministry of trade and industry which is tasked with the promotion of the countrys tourism industry. in august  the stb and the economic development board  unveiled a unified brand, singapore  passion made possible, to market singapore internationally for tourism and business purposes. the orchard road district, which contains multistorey shopping centres and hotels, can be considered the centre of shopping and tourism in singapore. other popular tourist attractions include the singapore zoo, river wonders, bird paradise and night safari. the singapore zoo has embraced the open zoo concept whereby animals are kept in enclosures, separated from visitors by hidden dry or wet moats, instead of caging the animals, and the river wonders has  species of animals, including numerous endangered species. singapore promotes itself as a medical tourism hub, with about , foreigners seeking medical care there each year. singapore medical services aim to serve at least one million foreign patients annually and generate us billion in revenue.

as of mid, the estimated population of singapore was ,, people, ,,  of whom were citizens, while the remaining ,,  were permanent residents  or international students, foreign workers, or dependants . according to the countrys  census, nearly  of singaporean residents  were foreign born; if nonresidents were counted, nearly  of the total population were foreign born.the same census also reports that about . of residents were of chinese descent, . of malay descent, . of indian descent, and . of other  descent. prior to , each person could register as a member of only one race, by default that of his or her father; therefore mixedrace persons were solely grouped under their fathers race in government censuses. from  onward, people may register using a multiracial classification, in which they may choose one primary race and one secondary race, but no more than two.the median age of singaporean residents was . in , and the total fertility rate is estimated to be . children per woman in , the lowest in the world and well below the . needed to replace the population. the government has attempted to increase fertility with limited success, as well as adjusting immigration policy to maintain its workingage population. of resident households  own the homes they live in, and the average household size is . persons . however, due to scarcity of land, . of resident households live in subsidised, highrise, public housing apartments developed by the housing and development board . also, . of resident households live in properties that are equal to, or larger than, a fourroom  hdb flat or in private housing. livein foreign domestic workers are quite common in singapore, with about , foreign domestic workers there, as of december .

most major religious denominations are present in singapore, with the interreligious organisation, singapore  recognising  major religions in the city state. a  analysis by the pew research center found singapore to be the worlds most religiously diverse nation.

buddhism is the most widely practised religion in singapore  of the resident population declared themselves adherents at the most recent census. the nextmost practised religion is christianity, followed by islam, taoism, and hinduism.  of the population did not have a religious affiliation. the proportion of christians, taoists, and nonreligious people increased between  and  by about  percentage points each, while the proportion of buddhists decreased. other faiths remained largely stable in their share of the population.there are monasteries and dharma centres from all three major traditions of buddhism in singapore theravada, mahayana, and vajrayana. most buddhists in singapore are chinese and are of the mahayana tradition, missionaries having come into the country from china for several decades. however, thailands theravada buddhism has seen growing popularity among the populace  during the past decade. the religion of soka gakkai international, a japanese buddhist organisation, is practised by many people in singapore, and mostly by those of chinese descent. tibetan buddhism has also made slow inroads into the country in recent years.

singapore has four official languages english, malay, mandarin, and tamil.

english is the lingua franca and the main language used in business, government, law and education. the constitution of singapore and all government legislation is written in english, and interpreters are required if a language other than english is used in the singaporean courts. statutory corporations conduct their businesses in english, while any official documents written in a nonenglish official language such as malay, mandarin, or tamil are typically translated into english to be accepted for use.malay was designated as a national language by the singaporean government after independence from britain in the s to avoid friction with singapores malayspeaking neighbours of malaysia and indonesia. it has a symbolic, rather than functional purpose. it is used in the national anthem majulah singapura, in citations of singaporean orders and decorations and in military commands. singaporean malay is officially written in the latinbased rumi script, though some singaporean malays also learn the arabicbased jawi script. jawi is considered an ethnic script for use on singaporean identity cards.singaporeans are mostly bilingual, typically with english as their common language and their mothertongue as a second language taught in schools, in order to preserve each individuals ethnic identity and values. according to the  census, english was the language most spoken at home, used by . of the population; mandarin was next, spoken at home by .. nearly half a million speak other ancestral southern varieties of chinese, mainly hokkien, teochew, and cantonese, as their home language, although the use of these is declining in favour of mandarin or just english. singapore chinese characters are written using simplified chinese characters.singaporean english is largely based on british english, owing to the countrys status as a former crown colony. however, forms of english spoken in singapore range from standard singapore english to a colloquial form known as singlish, which is discouraged by the government as it claims it to be a substandard english creole that handicaps singaporeans, presenting an obstacle to learning standard english and rendering the speaker incomprehensible to everyone except to another singlish speaker. standard singapore english is fully understandable to all standard english speakers, while most englishspeaking people do not understand singlish. nevertheless, singaporeans have a strong sense of identity and connection to singlish, whereby the existence of singlish is recognised as a distinctive cultural marker for many singaporeans. as such, in recent times, the government has tolerated the diglossia of both singlish and standard english , whilst continuously reinforcing the importance of standard english amongst those who speak only singlish .

education for primary, secondary, and tertiary levels is mostly supported by the state. all institutions, public and private, must be registered with the ministry of education . english is the language of instruction in all public schools, and all subjects are taught and examined in english except for the mother tongue language paper. while the term mother tongue in general refers to the first language internationally, in singapores education system, it is used to refer to the second language, as english is the first language. students who have been abroad for a while, or who struggle with their mother tongue language, are allowed to take a simpler syllabus or drop the subject.education takes place in three stages primary, secondary, and preuniversity education, with the primary education being compulsory. students begin with six years of primary school, which is made up of a fouryear foundation course and a twoyear orientation stage. the curriculum is focused on the development of english, the mother tongue, mathematics, and science. secondary school lasts from four to five years, and is divided between express, normal , and normal  streams in each school, depending on a students ability level. the basic coursework breakdown is the same as in the primary level, although classes are much more specialised. preuniversity education takes place at either the  junior colleges or the millennia institute, over a period of two and three years respectively. as alternatives to preuniversity education, however, courses are offered in other postsecondary education institutions, including the  polytechnics and  ite colleges. singapore has six public universities, of which the national university of singapore and nanyang technological university are among the top  universities in the world.national examinations are standardised across all schools, with a test taken after each stage. after the first six years of education, students take the primary school leaving examination , which determines their placement at secondary school. at the end of the secondary stage, olevel or nlevel exams are taken; at the end of the following preuniversity stage, the gce alevel exams are taken. some schools have a degree of freedom in their curriculum and are known as autonomous schools, for secondary education level and above.singapore is also an education hub, with more than , international students in . , malaysian students cross the johorsingapore causeway daily to attend schools in singapore. in ,  of all students in singaporean universities were international studentsthe maximum cap allowed, a majority from asean, china and india.singapore students have excelled in many of the world education benchmarks in maths, science and reading. in , both its primary and secondary students rank first in oecds global school performance rankings across  countriesdescribed as the most comprehensive map of education standards. in , singapore students topped both the program international student assessment  and the trends in international mathematics and science study . in the  ef english proficiency index taken in  countries, singapore place th and has been the only asian country in the top ten.

singapore has a generally efficient healthcare system, even though health expenditures are relatively low for developed countries. the world health organisation ranks singapores healthcare system as th overall in the world in its world health report. singapore has had the lowest infant mortality rates in the world for the past two decades. in , singaporeans had the longest life expectancy of any country at . years. women can expect to live an average of . years with . years in good health. the averages are lower for men. singapore is ranked st on the global food security index.as of december  and january , , foreigners and , singaporeans were respectively diagnosed with hiv, but there are fewer than  annual deaths from hiv per , people. adult obesity is below .there is a high level of immunisation.  in , the economist intelligence unit ranked singapore as having the best quality of life in asia and sixth overall in the world.the governments healthcare system is based upon the m framework. this has three components medifund, which provides a safety net for those not able to otherwise afford healthcare; medisave, a compulsory national medical savings account system covering about  of the population; and medishield, a governmentfunded health insurance program. public hospitals in singapore have a considerable autonomy in their management decisions, and notionally compete for patients, but remain in government ownership. a subsidy scheme exists for those on low income. in ,  of healthcare was funded by the government. healthcare accounts for approximately . of singapores gdp.

despite its small size, singapore has a diversity of languages, religions, and cultures. former prime ministers of singapore, lee kuan yew and goh chok tong, have stated that singapore does not fit the traditional description of a nation, calling it a societyintransition, pointing out the fact that singaporeans do not all speak the same language, share the same religion, or have the same customs. singaporeans who speak english as their native language would likely lean toward western culture , while those who speak chinese as their native language mostly lean toward chinese culture, which has linkages with chinese folk religion, buddhism, taoism and confucianism. malayspeaking singaporeans mostly lean toward malay culture, which itself is closely linked to islamic culture. tamilspeaking singaporeans mostly lean toward tamil culture, which itself is mostly linked to hindu culture. racial and religious harmony is regarded as a crucial part of singapores success, and played a part in building a singaporean identity.when singapore became independent from the united kingdom in , most singaporean citizens were transient migrant labourers who had no intention of staying permanently. there was also a sizeable minority of middleclass, locally born peopleknown as peranakans or babanyonyadescendants of th and thcentury chinese immigrants. with the exception of the peranakans who pledged their loyalties to singapore, most of the labourers loyalties lay with their respective homelands of malaya, china and india. after independence, the government began a deliberate process of crafting a uniquely singaporean identity and culture. singapore has a reputation as a nanny state. the government also places a heavy emphasis on meritocracy, where one is judged based on ones ability.the national flower of singapore is the hybrid orchid, vanda miss joaquim, named in memory of a singaporeborn armenian woman, who crossbred the flower in her garden at tanjong pagar in . singapore is known as the lion city and many national symbols such as the coat of arms and the lion head symbol make use of a lion. major religious festivals are public holidays.

during the s the national arts council was created to spearhead the development of performing arts, along with visual and literary art forms. the national gallery singapore is the nations flagship museum with some , works from singaporean and other southeast asian artists. the singapore art museum focuses on contemporary art. the red dot design museum celebrates exceptional art and design of objects for everyday life, hosting more than , items from  countries. the lotusshaped artscience museum hosts touring exhibitions that combine art with the sciences. other major museums include the asian civilisations museum, the peranakan museum, and the arts house. the esplanade is singapores largest performing arts centre. in  alone, it was the site of , free art and culture events.literature of singapore, or singlit, consists of a collection of literary works by singaporeans written chiefly in the countrys four official languages english, malay, mandarin, and tamil. singapore is increasingly regarded as having four subliteratures instead of one. many significant works have been translated and showcased in publications such as the literary journal singa, published in the s and s with editors including edwin thumboo and koh buck song, as well as in multilingual anthologies such as rhythms a singaporean millennial anthology of poetry , in which the poems were all translated three times each. a number of singaporean writers such as tan swie hian and kuo pao kun have contributed work in more than one language.singapore has a diverse music culture that ranges from pop and rock, to folk and classical. western classical music plays a significant role in the cultural life in singapore, with the singapore symphony orchestra  instituted in . other notable western orchestras in singapore include singapore national youth orchestra and the communitybased braddell heights symphony orchestra. many orchestras and ensembles are also found in secondary schools and junior colleges. various communities have their own distinct ethnic musical traditions chinese, malays, indians, and eurasians. with their traditional forms of music and various modern musical styles, the fusion of different forms account for the musical diversity in the country. the nations lively urban musical scene has made it a centre for international performances and festivals in the region. some of singapores best known pop singers include stefanie sun, jj lin, liang wern fook, taufik batisah and dick lee, who is famous for composing national day theme songs, including home.

singapores diversity of cuisine is touted as a reason to visit the country, due to its combination of convenience, variety, quality, and price. local food items generally relate to a particular ethnicity  chinese, malay and indian; but the diversity of cuisine has increased further by the hybridisation of different styles . in hawker centres, cultural diffusion is exemplified by traditionally malay hawker stalls also selling tamil food. hainanese chicken rice, based on the hainanese dish wenchang chicken, is considered singapores national dish.the citystate has a burgeoning food scene ranging from hawker centres , food courts , coffee shops , cafes, fast food, simple kitchens, casual, celebrity and highend restaurants. cloud kitchens and food delivery are also on the rise, with  of residents ordering from delivery apps at least once a month. many international celebrity chef restaurants are located within the integrated resorts. religious dietary strictures exist , and there is also a significant group of vegetarians. the singapore food festival which celebrates singapores cuisine is held annually in july.prior to the s, street food was sold mainly by immigrants from china, india, and malaysia to other immigrants seeking a familiar taste. in singapore, street food has long been associated with hawker centres with communal seating areas. typically, these centres have a few dozen to hundreds of food stalls, with each specialising in one or more related dishes. while street food can be found in many countries, the variety and reach of centralised hawker centres that serve heritage street food in singapore is unique. in , there were  hawker centres spread across the city centre and heartland housing estates. they are maintained by the national environment agency, which also grades each food stall for hygiene. the largest hawker centre is located on the second floor of chinatown complex, and contains over  stalls. the complex is also home to the cheapest michelinstarred meal in the world  a plate of soyasauce chicken rice or noodles for s . two street food stalls in the city are the first in the world to be awarded a michelin star, obtaining a single star each.

the development of private sports and recreation clubs began in the th century colonial singapore, with clubs founded during this time including the cricket club, the singapore recreation club, the singapore swimming club, and the hollandse club. weightlifter tan howe liang was singapores first olympic medalist, winning a silver at the  rome games.indoor and water sports are some of the most popular sports in singapore. at the  rio olympics, joseph schooling won singapores first olympic gold medal, claiming the metre butterfly in a new olympic record time of . seconds. singapore sailors have had success on the international stage, with their optimist team being considered among the best in the world. despite its size, the country has dominated swim meets in the southeast asia games. its mens water polo team won the sea games gold medal for the th time in , continuing singapore sports longest winning streak. singapore hosted the inaugural  summer youth olympics, in which , athletes from  nations competed in  sports. the island is home to one championship, the biggest mixed martial arts promotion in asia. singapores womens table tennis team were silver medalists at the  beijing olympics. they became world champions in  when they beat china at the world team table tennis championships in russia, breaking chinas year winning streak. in , singapores loh kean yew achieved a world champion status when he won a badminton gold at the  bwf world championships mens singles, which is one of the most prestigious badminton tournaments alongside the summer olympics badminton tournaments.singapores football league, the singapore premier league, was launched in  as the s.league and comprises eight clubs, including one foreign team. the singapore slingers is one of the inaugural teams in the asean basketball league, which was founded in october . kranji racecourse is run by the singapore turf club and hosts several meetings per week, including international racesnotably the singapore airlines international cup.singapore began hosting a round of the formula one world championship, the singapore grand prix at the marina bay street circuit in . it was the inaugural f night race, and the first f street race in asia. it is considered a signature event on the f calendar.

companies linked to the government control much of the domestic media in singapore. mediacorp operates most freetoair television channels and freetoair radio stations in singapore. there are a total of six freetoair tv channels offered by mediacorp. starhub tv and singtel tv also offer iptv with channels from all around the world. sph media trust, a body with close links to the government, controls most of the newspaper industry in singapore.singapores media industry has sometimes been criticised for being overly regulated and lacking in freedom by human rights groups such as freedom house. selfcensorship among journalists is said to be common. in , singapore was ranked  on the press freedom index published by reporters without borders, up from  the previous year. the media development authority regulates singaporean media, claiming to balance the demand for choice and protection against offensive and harmful material. private ownership of tv satellite dishes is banned.internet in singapore is provided by stateowned singtel, partially stateowned starhub and m limited as well as some other business internet service providers  that offer residential service plans of speeds up to  gbit/s as of spring . equinix  and the singapore internet exchange  are internet exchange points where internet service providers and content delivery networks exchange internet traffic between their networks  in various locations in singapore. in the mids to s, singaporeans could also use the locally based videotext service singapore teleview to communicate with one another. the phrase intelligent island arose in the s in reference to the island nations early adaptive relationship with the internet.in , there were an estimated . million internet users in singapore, representing . of the population. the singapore government does not engage in widespread censoring of the internet, but it maintains a list of one hundred websitesmostly pornographicthat it blocks from home internet access as a symbolic statement of the singaporean communitys stand on harmful and undesirable content on the internet. singapore has the worlds highest smartphone penetration rates, in surveys by deloitte and the google consumer barometerat  and  of the population respectively in . the overall mobile phone penetration rate is at  mobile phone subscribers per  people.

elizabeth i  was queen of england and ireland from  november  until her death in . elizabeth was the last monarch of the house of tudor and is sometimes referred to as the virgin queen.elizabeth was the only surviving daughter of henry viii by anne boleyn, his second wife, who was executed when elizabeth was two years old. annes marriage to henry was annulled, and elizabeth declared illegitimate. henry restored her to the line of succession when she was ten, via the third succession act . after henrys death in , elizabeths younger halfbrother edward vi ruled until his own death in , bequeathing the crown to a protestant cousin, lady jane grey and ignoring the claims of his two halfsisters, the catholic mary and the younger elizabeth, in spite of statutes to the contrary. edwards will was set aside within weeks of his death and mary became queen, deposing and executing jane. during marys reign, elizabeth was imprisoned for nearly a year on suspicion of supporting protestant rebels.

upon her halfsisters death in , elizabeth succeeded to the throne and set out to rule by good counsel. she depended heavily on a group of trusted advisers led by william cecil, whom she created baron burghley. one of her first actions as queen was the establishment of an english protestant church, of which she became the supreme governor. this elizabethan religious settlement was to evolve into the church of england. it was expected that elizabeth would marry and produce an heir; however, despite numerous courtships, she never did. she was eventually succeeded by her first cousin twice removed, james vi of scotland, the son of mary, queen of scots.

in government, elizabeth was more moderate than her father and siblings had been. one of her mottoes was video et taceo . in religion, she was relatively tolerant and avoided systematic persecution. after the pope declared her illegitimate in , which in theory released english catholics from allegiance to her, several conspiracies threatened her life, all of which were defeated with the help of her ministers secret service, run by francis walsingham. elizabeth was cautious in foreign affairs, manoeuvring between the major powers of france and spain. she halfheartedly supported a number of ineffective, poorly resourced military campaigns in the netherlands, france, and ireland. by the mids, england could no longer avoid war with spain.

as she grew older, elizabeth became celebrated for her virginity. a cult of personality grew around her which was celebrated in the portraits, pageants, and literature of the day. elizabeths reign became known as the elizabethan era. the period is famous for the flourishing of english drama, led by playwrights such as william shakespeare and christopher marlowe, the prowess of english maritime adventurers, such as francis drake and walter raleigh, and for the defeat of the spanish armada. some historians depict elizabeth as a shorttempered, sometimes indecisive ruler, who enjoyed more than her fair share of luck. towards the end of her reign, a series of economic and military problems weakened her popularity. elizabeth is acknowledged as a charismatic performer  and a dogged survivor  in an era when government was ramshackle and limited, and when monarchs in neighbouring countries faced internal problems that jeopardised their thrones. after the short, disastrous reigns of her siblings, her  years on the throne provided welcome stability for the kingdom and helped to forge a sense of national identity.

elizabeth was born at greenwich palace on  september  and was named after her grandmothers, elizabeth of york and lady elizabeth howard. she was the second child of henry viii of england born in wedlock to survive infancy. her mother was henrys second wife, anne boleyn. at birth, elizabeth was the heir presumptive to the english throne. her elder halfsister mary had lost her position as a legitimate heir when henry annulled his marriage to marys mother, catherine of aragon, to marry anne, with the intent to sire a male heir and ensure the tudor succession. she was baptised on  september , and her godparents were thomas cranmer, archbishop of canterbury; henry courtenay, st marquess of exeter; elizabeth stafford, duchess of norfolk; and margaret wotton, dowager marchioness of dorset. a canopy was carried at the ceremony over the infant by her uncle george boleyn, viscount rochford; john hussey, st baron hussey of sleaford; lord thomas howard; and william howard, st baron howard of effingham.elizabeth was two years and eight months old when her mother was beheaded on  may , four months after catherine of aragons death from natural causes. elizabeth was declared illegitimate and deprived of her place in the royal succession. eleven days after anne boleyns execution, henry married jane seymour. queen jane died the next year shortly after the birth of their son, edward, who was undisputed heir apparent to the throne. elizabeth was placed in her halfbrothers household and carried the chrisom, or baptismal cloth, at his christening.

elizabeths first governess, margaret bryan, wrote that she was as toward a child and as gentle of conditions as ever i knew any in my life. catherine champernowne, better known by her later, married name of catherine kat ashley, was appointed as elizabeths governess in , and she remained elizabeths friend until her death in . champernowne taught elizabeth four languages french, dutch, italian and spanish. by the time william grindal became her tutor in , elizabeth could write english, latin, and italian. under grindal, a talented and skilful tutor, she also progressed in french and greek. by the age of , she was able to translate her stepmother catherine parrs religious work prayers or meditations from english into italian, latin, and french, which she presented to her father as a new years gift. from her teenage years and throughout her life, she translated works in latin and greek by numerous classical authors, including the pro marcello of cicero, the de consolatione philosophiae of boethius, a treatise by plutarch, and the annals of tacitus. a translation of tacitus from lambeth palace library, one of only four surviving english translations from the early modern era, was confirmed as elizabeths own in , after a detailed analysis of the handwriting and paper was undertaken.after grindal died in , elizabeth received her education under her brother edwards tutor, roger ascham, a sympathetic teacher who believed that learning should be engaging. current knowledge of elizabeths schooling and precocity comes largely from aschams memoirs. by the time her formal education ended in , elizabeth was one of the best educated women of her generation. at the end of her life, she was believed to speak the welsh, cornish, scottish and irish languages in addition to those mentioned above. the venetian ambassador stated in  that she possessed these languages so thoroughly that each appeared to be her native tongue. historian mark stoyle suggests that she was probably taught cornish by william killigrew, groom of the privy chamber and later chamberlain of the exchequer.

henry viii died in  and elizabeths halfbrother, edward vi, became king at the age of nine. catherine parr, henrys widow, soon married thomas seymour, st baron seymour of sudeley, edward vis uncle and the brother of lord protector edward seymour, st duke of somerset. the couple took elizabeth into their household at chelsea. there elizabeth experienced an emotional crisis that some historians believe affected her for the rest of her life. thomas seymour engaged in romps and horseplay with the yearold elizabeth, including entering her bedroom in his nightgown, tickling her, and slapping her on the buttocks. elizabeth rose early and surrounded herself with maids to avoid his unwelcome morning visits. parr, rather than confront her husband over his inappropriate activities, joined in. twice she accompanied him in tickling elizabeth, and once held her while he cut her black gown into a thousand pieces. however, after parr discovered the pair in an embrace, she ended this state of affairs. in may , elizabeth was sent away.

thomas seymour nevertheless continued scheming to control the royal family and tried to have himself appointed the governor of the kings person. when parr died after childbirth on  september , he renewed his attentions towards elizabeth, intent on marrying her. her governess kat ashley, who was fond of seymour, sought to convince elizabeth to take him as her husband. she tried to convince elizabeth to write to seymour and comfort him in his sorrow, but elizabeth claimed that thomas was not so saddened by her stepmothers death as to need comfort.

in january , seymour was arrested and imprisoned in the tower on suspicion of conspiring to depose his brother somerset as protector, marry lady jane grey to king edward vi, and take elizabeth as his own wife. elizabeth, living at hatfield house, would admit nothing. her stubbornness exasperated her interrogator, robert tyrwhitt, who reported, i do see it in her face that she is guilty. seymour was beheaded on  march .

edward vi died on  july , aged . his will ignored the succession to the crown act , excluded both mary and elizabeth from the succession, and instead declared as his heir lady jane grey, granddaughter of henry viiis younger sister mary tudor, queen of france. jane was proclaimed queen by the privy council, but her support quickly crumbled, and she was deposed after nine days. on  august , mary rode triumphantly into london, with elizabeth at her side.

the show of solidarity between the sisters did not last long. mary, a devout catholic, was determined to crush the protestant faith in which elizabeth had been educated, and she ordered that everyone attend catholic mass; elizabeth had to outwardly conform. marys initial popularity ebbed away in  when she announced plans to marry philip of spain, the son of holy roman emperor charles v and an active catholic. discontent spread rapidly through the country, and many looked to elizabeth as a focus for their opposition to marys religious policies.

in january and february , wyatts rebellion broke out; it was soon suppressed. elizabeth was brought to court and interrogated regarding her role, and on  march, she was imprisoned in the tower of london. elizabeth fervently protested her innocence. though it is unlikely that she had plotted with the rebels, some of them were known to have approached her. marys closest confidant, emperor charless ambassador simon renard, argued that her throne would never be safe while elizabeth lived; and lord chancellor stephen gardiner, worked to have elizabeth put on trial. elizabeths supporters in the government, including william paget, st baron paget, convinced mary to spare her sister in the absence of hard evidence against her. instead, on  may, elizabeth was moved from the tower to woodstock, where she was to spend almost a year under house arrest in the charge of henry bedingfeld. crowds cheered her all along the way.on  april , elizabeth was recalled to court to attend the final stages of marys apparent pregnancy. if mary and her child died, elizabeth would become queen, but if mary gave birth to a healthy child, elizabeths chances of becoming queen would recede sharply. when it became clear that mary was not pregnant, no one believed any longer that she could have a child. elizabeths succession seemed assured.king philip, who ascended the spanish throne in , acknowledged the new political reality and cultivated his sisterinlaw. she was a better ally than the chief alternative, mary, queen of scots, who had grown up in france and was betrothed to the dauphin of france. when his wife fell ill in , king philip sent the count of feria to consult with elizabeth. this interview was conducted at hatfield house, where she had returned to live in october . by october , elizabeth was already making plans for her government. mary recognised elizabeth as her heir on  november , and elizabeth became queen when mary died on  november.

elizabeth became queen at the age of , and declared her intentions to her council and other peers who had come to hatfield to swear allegiance. the speech contains the first record of her adoption of the medieval political theology of the sovereigns two bodies the body natural and the body politic

my lords, the law of nature moves me to sorrow for my sister; the burden that is fallen upon me makes me amazed, and yet, considering i am gods creature, ordained to obey his appointment, i will thereto yield, desiring from the bottom of my heart that i may have assistance of his grace to be the minister of his heavenly will in this office now committed to me. and as i am but one body naturally considered, though by his permission a body politic to govern, so shall i desire you all ... to be assistant to me, that i with my ruling and you with your service may make a good account to almighty god and leave some comfort to our posterity on earth. i mean to direct all my actions by good advice and counsel.

as her triumphal progress wound through the city on the eve of the coronation ceremony, she was welcomed wholeheartedly by the citizens and greeted by orations and pageants, most with a strong protestant flavour. elizabeths open and gracious responses endeared her to the spectators, who were wonderfully ravished. the following day,  january , a date chosen by her astrologer john dee, elizabeth was crowned and anointed by owen oglethorpe, the catholic bishop of carlisle, in westminster abbey. she was then presented for the peoples acceptance, amidst a deafening noise of organs, fifes, trumpets, drums, and bells. although elizabeth was welcomed as queen in england, the country was still in a state of anxiety over the perceived catholic threat at home and overseas, as well as the choice of whom she would marry.

elizabeths personal religious convictions have been much debated by scholars. she was a protestant, but kept catholic symbols , and downplayed the role of sermons in defiance of a key protestant belief.elizabeth and her advisers perceived the threat of a catholic crusade against heretical england. the queen therefore sought a protestant solution that would not offend catholics too greatly while addressing the desires of english protestants, but she would not tolerate the puritans, who were pushing for farreaching reforms. as a result, the parliament of  started to legislate for a church based on the protestant settlement of edward vi, with the monarch as its head, but with many catholic elements, such as vestments.the house of commons backed the proposals strongly, but the bill of supremacy met opposition in the house of lords, particularly from the bishops. elizabeth was fortunate that many bishoprics were vacant at the time, including the archbishopric of canterbury. this enabled supporters amongst peers to outvote the bishops and conservative peers. nevertheless, elizabeth was forced to accept the title of supreme governor of the church of england rather than the more contentious title of supreme head, which many thought unacceptable for a woman to bear. the new act of supremacy became law on  may . all public officials were to swear an oath of loyalty to the monarch as the supreme governor or risk disqualification from office; the heresy laws were repealed, to avoid a repeat of the persecution of dissenters practised by mary. at the same time, a new act of uniformity was passed, which made attendance at church and the use of the  book of common prayer  compulsory, though the penalties for recusancy, or failure to attend and conform, were not extreme.

from the start of elizabeths reign it was expected that she would marry, and the question arose to whom. although she received many offers, she never married and remained childless; the reasons for this are not clear. historians have speculated that thomas seymour had put her off sexual relationships. she considered several suitors until she was about fifty. her last courtship was with francis, duke of anjou,  years her junior. while risking possible loss of power like her sister, who played into the hands of king philip ii of spain, marriage offered the chance of an heir. however, the choice of a husband might also provoke political instability or even insurrection.

in the spring of , it became evident that elizabeth was in love with her childhood friend robert dudley. it was said that his wife amy was suffering from a malady in one of her breasts and that the queen would like to marry robert if his wife should die. by the autumn of , several foreign suitors were vying for elizabeths hand; their impatient envoys engaged in ever more scandalous talk and reported that a marriage with her favourite was not welcome in england there is not a man who does not cry out on him and her with indignation ... she will marry none but the favoured robert. amy dudley died in september , from a fall from a flight of stairs and, despite the coroners inquest finding of accident, many people suspected her husband of having arranged her death so that he could marry the queen. elizabeth seriously considered marrying dudley for some time. however, william cecil, nicholas throckmorton, and some conservative peers made their disapproval unmistakably clear. there were even rumours that the nobility would rise if the marriage took place.among other marriage candidates being considered for the queen, robert dudley continued to be regarded as a possible candidate for nearly another decade. elizabeth was extremely jealous of his affections, even when she no longer meant to marry him herself. she raised dudley to the peerage as earl of leicester in . in , he finally married lettice knollys, to whom the queen reacted with repeated scenes of displeasure and lifelong hatred. still, dudley always remained at the centre of elizabeths emotional life, as historian susan doran has described the situation. he died shortly after the defeat of the spanish armada in . after elizabeths own death, a note from him was found among her most personal belongings, marked his last letter in her handwriting.

marriage negotiations constituted a key element in elizabeths foreign policy. she turned down the hand of philip, her halfsisters widower, early in  but for several years entertained the proposal of king eric xiv of sweden. earlier in elizabeths life a danish match for her had been discussed; henry viii had proposed one with the danish prince adolf, duke of holsteingottorp, in , and edward seymour, duke of somerset, suggested a marriage with prince frederick  several years later, but the negotiations had abated in . in the years around  a danoenglish protestant alliance was considered, and to counter swedens proposal, king frederick ii proposed to elizabeth in late .

for several years she also seriously negotiated to marry philips cousin charles ii, archduke of austria. by , relations with the habsburgs had deteriorated. elizabeth considered marriage to two french valois princes in turn, first henry, duke of anjou, and then from  to  his brother francis, duke of anjou, formerly duke of alenon. this last proposal was tied to a planned alliance against spanish control of the southern netherlands. elizabeth seems to have taken the courtship seriously for a time, and wore a frogshaped earring that francis had sent her.in , elizabeth told an imperial envoy if i follow the inclination of my nature, it is this beggarwoman and single, far rather than queen and married. later in the year, following elizabeths illness with smallpox, the succession question became a heated issue in parliament. members urged the queen to marry or nominate an heir, to prevent a civil war upon her death. she refused to do either. in april she prorogued the parliament, which did not reconvene until she needed its support to raise taxes in .

having previously promised to marry, she told an unruly house

i will never break the word of a prince spoken in public place, for my honours sake. and therefore i say again, i will marry as soon as i can conveniently, if god take not him away with whom i mind to marry, or myself, or else some other great let obstruction happen.

by , senior figures in the government privately accepted that elizabeth would never marry or name a successor. william cecil was already seeking solutions to the succession problem. for her failure to marry, elizabeth was often accused of irresponsibility. her silence, however, strengthened her own political security she knew that if she named an heir, her throne would be vulnerable to a coup; she remembered the way that a second person, as i have been had been used as the focus of plots against her predecessor.

elizabeths unmarried status inspired a cult of virginity related to that of the virgin mary. in poetry and portraiture, she was depicted as a virgin, a goddess, or both, not as a normal woman. at first, only elizabeth made a virtue of her ostensible virginity in , she told the commons, and, in the end, this shall be for me sufficient, that a marble stone shall declare that a queen, having reigned such a time, lived and died a virgin. later on, poets and writers took up the theme and developed an iconography that exalted elizabeth. public tributes to the virgin by  acted as a coded assertion of opposition to the queens marriage negotiations with the duke of alenon. ultimately, elizabeth would insist she was married to her kingdom and subjects, under divine protection. in , she spoke of all my husbands, my good people.

this claim of virginity was not universally accepted. catholics accused elizabeth of engaging in filthy lust that symbolically defiled the nation along with her body. henry iv of france said that one of the great questions of europe was whether queen elizabeth was a maid or no.a central issue, when it comes to the question of elizabeths virginity, was whether the queen ever consummated her love affair with robert dudley. in , she had dudleys bedchambers moved next to her own apartments. in , she was mysteriously bedridden with an illness that caused her body to swell.in , a young man calling himself arthur dudley was arrested on the coast of spain under suspicion of being a spy. the man claimed to be the illegitimate son of elizabeth and robert dudley, with his age being consistent with birth during the  illness. he was taken to madrid for investigation, where he was examined by francis englefield, a catholic aristocrat exiled to spain and secretary to king philip ii. three letters exist today describing the interview, detailing what arthur proclaimed to be the story of his life, from birth in the royal palace to the time of his arrival in spain. however, this failed to convince the spanish englefield admitted to king philip that arthurs claim at present amounts to nothing, but suggested that he should not be allowed to get away, but ... kept very secure. the king agreed, and arthur was never heard from again. modern scholarship dismisses the storys basic premise as impossible, and asserts that elizabeths life was so closely observed by contemporaries that she could not have hidden a pregnancy.

elizabeths first policy toward scotland was to oppose the french presence there. she feared that the french planned to invade england and put her catholic cousin mary, queen of scots, on the throne. mary was considered by many to be the heir to the english crown, being the granddaughter of henry viiis elder sister, margaret. mary boasted being the nearest kinswoman she hath. elizabeth was persuaded to send a force into scotland to aid the protestant rebels, and though the campaign was inept, the resulting treaty of edinburgh of july  removed the french threat in the north. when mary returned to scotland in  to take up the reins of power, the country had an established protestant church and was run by a council of protestant nobles supported by elizabeth. mary refused to ratify the treaty.in , elizabeth proposed her own suitor, robert dudley, as a husband for mary, without asking either of the two people concerned. both proved unenthusiastic, and in , mary married henry stuart, lord darnley, who carried his own claim to the english throne. the marriage was the first of a series of errors of judgement by mary that handed the victory to the scottish protestants and to elizabeth. darnley quickly became unpopular and was murdered in february  by conspirators almost certainly led by james hepburn, th earl of bothwell. shortly afterwards, on  may , mary married bothwell, arousing suspicions that she had been party to the murder of her husband. elizabeth confronted mary about the marriage, writing to her

how could a worse choice be made for your honour than in such haste to marry such a subject, who besides other and notorious lacks, public fame has charged with the murder of your late husband, besides the touching of yourself also in some part, though we trust in that behalf falsely.

these events led rapidly to marys defeat and imprisonment in lochleven castle. the scottish lords forced her to abdicate in favour of her son james vi, who had been born in june . james was taken to stirling castle to be raised as a protestant. mary escaped in  but after a defeat at langside sailed to england, where she had once been assured of support from elizabeth. elizabeths first instinct was to restore her fellow monarch, but she and her council instead chose to play safe. rather than risk returning mary to scotland with an english army or sending her to france and the catholic enemies of england, they detained her in england, where she was imprisoned for the next nineteen years.

mary was soon the focus for rebellion. in  there was a major catholic rising in the north; the goal was to free mary, marry her to thomas howard, th duke of norfolk, and put her on the english throne. after the rebels defeat, over  of them were executed on elizabeths orders. in the belief that the revolt had been successful, pope pius v issued a bull in , titled regnans in excelsis, which declared elizabeth, the pretended queen of england and the servant of crime to be excommunicated and a heretic, releasing all her subjects from any allegiance to her. catholics who obeyed her orders were threatened with excommunication. the papal bull provoked legislative initiatives against catholics by parliament, which were, however, mitigated by elizabeths intervention. in , to convert english subjects to catholicism with the intent to withdraw them from their allegiance to elizabeth was made a treasonable offence, carrying the death penalty. from the s missionary priests from continental seminaries went to england secretly in the cause of the reconversion of england. many suffered execution, engendering a cult of martyrdom.regnans in excelsis gave english catholics a strong incentive to look to mary as the legitimate sovereign of england. mary may not have been told of every catholic plot to put her on the english throne, but from the ridolfi plot of   to the babington plot of , elizabeths spymaster francis walsingham and the royal council keenly assembled a case against her. at first, elizabeth resisted calls for marys death. by late , she had been persuaded to sanction marys trial and execution on the evidence of letters written during the babington plot. elizabeths proclamation of the sentence announced that the said mary, pretending title to the same crown, had compassed and imagined within the same realm diverse things tending to the hurt, death and destruction of our royal person. on  february , mary was beheaded at fotheringhay castle, northamptonshire. after the execution, elizabeth claimed that she had not intended for the signed execution warrant to be dispatched, and blamed her secretary, william davison, for implementing it without her knowledge. the sincerity of elizabeths remorse and whether or not she wanted to delay the warrant have been called into question both by her contemporaries and later historians.

elizabeths foreign policy was largely defensive. the exception was the english occupation of le havre from october  to june , which ended in failure when elizabeths huguenot allies joined with the catholics to retake the port. elizabeths intention had been to exchange le havre for calais, lost to france in january . only through the activities of her fleets did elizabeth pursue an aggressive policy. this paid off in the war against spain,  of which was fought at sea. she knighted francis drake after his circumnavigation of the globe from  to , and he won fame for his raids on spanish ports and fleets. an element of piracy and selfenrichment drove elizabethan seafarers, over whom the queen had little control.

after the occupation and loss of le havre in , elizabeth avoided military expeditions on the continent until , when she sent an english army to aid the protestant dutch rebels against philip ii. this followed the deaths in  of the queens allies william the silent, prince of orange, and the duke of anjou, and the surrender of a series of dutch towns to alexander farnese, duke of parma, philips governor of the spanish netherlands. in december , an alliance between philip ii and the french catholic league at joinville undermined the ability of anjous brother, henry iii of france, to counter spanish domination of the netherlands. it also extended spanish influence along the channel coast of france, where the catholic league was strong, and exposed england to invasion. the siege of antwerp in the summer of  by the duke of parma necessitated some reaction on the part of the english and the dutch. the outcome was the treaty of nonsuch of august , in which elizabeth promised military support to the dutch. the treaty marked the beginning of the anglospanish war, which lasted until the treaty of london in .

the expedition was led by elizabeths former suitor, the earl of leicester. elizabeth from the start did not really back this course of action. her strategy, to support the dutch on the surface with an english army, while beginning secret peace talks with spain within days of leicesters arrival in holland, had necessarily to be at odds with leicesters, who had set up a protectorate and was expected by the dutch to fight an active campaign. elizabeth, on the other hand, wanted him to avoid at all costs any decisive action with the enemy. he enraged elizabeth by accepting the post of governorgeneral from the dutch states general. elizabeth saw this as a dutch ploy to force her to accept sovereignty over the netherlands, which so far she had always declined. she wrote to leicester

we could never have imagined  that a man raised up by ourself and extraordinarily favoured by us, above any other subject of this land, would have in so contemptible a sort broken our commandment in a cause that so greatly touches us in honour ... and therefore our express pleasure and commandment is that, all delays and excuses laid apart, you do presently upon the duty of your allegiance obey and fulfill whatsoever the bearer hereof shall direct you to do in our name. whereof fail you not, as you will answer the contrary at your utmost peril.

elizabeths commandment was that her emissary read out her letters of disapproval publicly before the dutch council of state, leicester having to stand nearby. this public humiliation of her lieutenantgeneral combined with her continued talks for a separate peace with spain irreversibly undermined leicesters standing among the dutch. the military campaign was severely hampered by elizabeths repeated refusals to send promised funds for her starving soldiers. her unwillingness to commit herself to the cause, leicesters own shortcomings as a political and military leader, and the factionridden and chaotic situation of dutch politics led to the failure of the campaign. leicester finally resigned his command in december .

meanwhile, francis drake had undertaken a major voyage against spanish ports and ships in the caribbean in  and . in  he made a successful raid on cdiz, destroying the spanish fleet of war ships intended for the enterprise of england, as philip ii had decided to take the war to england.on  july , the spanish armada, a great fleet of ships, set sail for the channel, planning to ferry a spanish invasion force under the duke of parma to the coast of southeast england from the netherlands. the armada was defeated by a combination of miscalculation, misfortune, and an attack of english fire ships off gravelines at midnight on  july , which dispersed the spanish ships to the northeast. the armada straggled home to spain in shattered remnants, after disastrous losses on the coast of ireland . unaware of the armadas fate, english militias mustered to defend the country under the earl of leicesters command. leicester invited elizabeth to inspect her troops at tilbury in essex on  august. wearing a silver breastplate over a white velvet dress, she addressed them in one of her most famous speeches

my loving people, we have been persuaded by some that are careful of our safety, to take heed how we commit ourself to armed multitudes for fear of treachery; but i assure you, i do not desire to live to distrust my faithful and loving people ... i know i have the body but of a weak and feeble woman, but i have the heart and stomach of a king, and of a king of england too, and think foul scorn that parma or spain, or any prince of europe should dare to invade the borders of my realm.

when no invasion came, the nation rejoiced. elizabeths procession to a thanksgiving service at st pauls cathedral rivalled that of her coronation as a spectacle. the defeat of the armada was a potent propaganda victory, both for elizabeth and for protestant england. the english took their delivery as a symbol of gods favour and of the nations inviolability under a virgin queen. however, the victory was not a turning point in the war, which continued and often favoured spain. the spanish still controlled the southern provinces of the netherlands, and the threat of invasion remained. walter raleigh claimed after her death that elizabeths caution had impeded the war against spain

if the late queen would have believed her men of war as she did her scribes, we had in her time beaten that great empire in pieces and made their kings of figs and oranges as in old times. but her majesty did all by halves, and by petty invasions taught the spaniard how to defend himself, and to see his own weakness.

though some historians have criticised elizabeth on similar grounds, raleighs verdict has more often been judged unfair. elizabeth had good reason not to place too much trust in her commanders, who once in action tended, as she put it herself, to be transported with an haviour of vainglory.in , the year after the spanish armada, elizabeth sent to spain the english armada or counter armada with , men and  ships, led by francis drake as admiral and john norreys as general. the english fleet suffered a catastrophic defeat with ,, killed, wounded or died of disease and  ships sunk or captured. the advantage england had won upon the destruction of the spanish armada was lost, and the spanish victory marked a revival of philip iis naval power through the next decade.

when the protestant henry iv inherited the french throne in , elizabeth sent him military support. it was her first venture into france since the retreat from le havre in . henrys succession was strongly contested by the catholic league and by philip ii, and elizabeth feared a spanish takeover of the channel ports.

the subsequent english campaigns in france, however, were disorganised and ineffective. peregrine bertie, largely ignoring elizabeths orders, roamed northern france to little effect, with an army of , men. he withdrew in disarray in december , having lost half his troops. in , the campaign of john norreys, who led , men to brittany, was even more of a disaster. as for all such expeditions, elizabeth was unwilling to invest in the supplies and reinforcements requested by the commanders. norreys left for london to plead in person for more support. in his absence, a catholic league army almost destroyed the remains of his army at craon, northwest france, in may .

in july, elizabeth sent out another force under robert devereux, nd earl of essex, to help henry iv in besieging rouen. the result was just as dismal. essex accomplished nothing and returned home in january . henry abandoned the siege in april. as usual, elizabeth lacked control over her commanders once they were abroad. where he is, or what he doth, or what he is to do, she wrote of essex, we are ignorant.

although ireland was one of her two kingdoms, elizabeth faced a hostile, and in places virtually autonomous, irish population that adhered to catholicism and was willing to defy her authority and plot with her enemies. her policy there was to grant land to her courtiers and prevent the rebels from giving spain a base from which to attack england. in the course of a series of uprisings, crown forces pursued scorchedearth tactics, burning the land and slaughtering man, woman and child. during a revolt in munster led by gerald fitzgerald, in , an estimated , irish people starved to death. the poet and colonist edmund spenser wrote that the victims were brought to such wretchedness as that any stony heart would have rued the same. elizabeth advised her commanders that the irish, that rude and barbarous nation, be well treated, but she or her commanders showed no remorse when force and bloodshed served their authoritarian purpose.between  and , elizabeth faced her most severe test in ireland during the nine years war, a revolt that took place at the height of hostilities with spain, who backed the rebel leader, hugh oneill. in spring , elizabeth sent robert devereux, to put the revolt down. to her frustration, he made little progress and returned to england in defiance of her orders. he was replaced by charles blount, who took three years to defeat the rebels. oneill finally surrendered in , a few days after elizabeths death. soon afterwards, a peace treaty was signed between england and spain.

elizabeth continued to maintain the diplomatic relations with the tsardom of russia that were originally established by her halfbrother, edward vi. she often wrote to tsar ivan the terrible on amicable terms, though the tsar was often annoyed by her focus on commerce rather than on the possibility of a military alliance. ivan even proposed to her once, and during his later reign, asked for a guarantee to be granted asylum in england should his rule be jeopardised. english merchant and explorer anthony jenkinson, who began his career as a representative of the muscovy company, became the queens special ambassador to the court of tsar ivan.upon his death in , ivan was succeeded by his son feodor i. unlike his father, feodor had no enthusiasm in maintaining exclusive trading rights with england. he declared his kingdom open to all foreigners, and dismissed the english ambassador jerome bowes, whose pomposity had been tolerated by ivan. elizabeth sent a new ambassador, dr. giles fletcher, to demand from the regent boris godunov that he convince the tsar to reconsider. the negotiations failed, due to fletcher addressing feodor with two of his many titles omitted. elizabeth continued to appeal to feodor in half appealing, half reproachful letters. she proposed an alliance, something which she had refused to do when offered one by feodors father, but was turned down.

trade and diplomatic relations developed between england and the barbary states during the rule of elizabeth. england established a trading relationship with morocco in opposition to spain, selling armour, ammunition, timber, and metal in exchange for moroccan sugar, in spite of a papal ban. in , abd elouahed ben messaoud, the principal secretary to the moroccan ruler mulai ahmad almansur, visited england as an ambassador to the english court, to negotiate an anglomoroccan alliance against spain. elizabeth agreed to sell munitions supplies to morocco, and she and mulai ahmad almansur talked on and off about mounting a joint operation against the spanish. discussions, however, remained inconclusive, and both rulers died within two years of the embassy.diplomatic relations were also established with the ottoman empire with the chartering of the levant company and the dispatch of the first english ambassador to the sublime porte, william harborne, in . for the first time, a treaty of commerce was signed in . numerous envoys were dispatched in both directions and epistolar exchanges occurred between elizabeth and sultan murad iii. in one correspondence, murad entertained the notion that protestantism and islam had much more in common than either did with roman catholicism, as both rejected the worship of idols, and argued for an alliance between england and the ottoman empire. to the dismay of catholic europe, england exported tin and lead  and ammunitions to the ottoman empire, and elizabeth seriously discussed joint military operations with murad iii during the outbreak of war with spain in , as francis walsingham was lobbying for a direct ottoman military involvement against the common spanish enemy.

in , humphrey gilbert sailed west to establish a colony in newfoundland. he never returned to england. gilberts halfbrother walter raleigh explored the atlantic coast and claimed the territory of virginia, perhaps named in honour of elizabeth, the virgin queen. this territory was much larger than the presentday state of virginia, extending from new england to the carolinas. in , raleigh returned to virginia with a small group of people. they landed on roanoke island, off presentday north carolina. after the failure of the first colony, raleigh recruited another group and put john white in command. when raleigh returned in , there was no trace of the roanoke colony he had left, but it was the first english settlement in north america.

the east india company was formed to trade in the indian ocean region and china, and received its charter from queen elizabeth on  december . for a period of  years, the company was awarded a monopoly on english trade with all countries east of the cape of good hope and west of the straits of magellan. james lancaster commanded the first expedition in . the company eventually controlled half of world trade and substantial territory in india in the th and th centuries.

the period after the defeat of the spanish armada in  brought new difficulties for elizabeth that lasted until the end of her reign. the conflicts with spain and in ireland dragged on, the tax burden grew heavier, and the economy was hit by poor harvests and the cost of war. prices rose and the standard of living fell. during this time, repression of catholics intensified, and elizabeth authorised commissions in  to interrogate and monitor catholic householders. to maintain the illusion of peace and prosperity, she increasingly relied on internal spies and propaganda. in her last years, mounting criticism reflected a decline in the publics affection for her.

one of the causes for this second reign of elizabeth, as it is sometimes called, was the changed character of elizabeths governing body, the privy council in the s. a new generation was in power. with the exception of william cecil, baron burghley, the most important politicians had died around  the earl of leicester in ; francis walsingham in ; and christopher hatton in . factional strife in the government, which had not existed in a noteworthy form before the s, now became its hallmark. a bitter rivalry arose between robert devereux, the earl of essex, and robert cecil, son of lord burghley, with both being supported by their respective adherents. the struggle for the most powerful positions in the state marred the kingdoms politics. the queens personal authority was lessening, as is shown in the  affair of dr. lopez, her trusted physician. when he was wrongly accused by the earl of essex of treason out of personal pique, she could not prevent the doctors execution, although she had been angry about his arrest and seems not to have believed in his guilt.during the last years of her reign, elizabeth came to rely on the granting of monopolies as a costfree system of patronage, rather than asking parliament for more subsidies in a time of war. the practice soon led to pricefixing, the enrichment of courtiers at the publics expense, and widespread resentment. this culminated in agitation in the house of commons during the parliament of . in her famous golden speech of  november  at whitehall palace to a deputation of  members, elizabeth professed ignorance of the abuses, and won the members over with promises and her usual appeal to the emotions

who keeps their sovereign from the lapse of error, in which, by ignorance and not by intent they might have fallen, what thank they deserve, we know, though you may guess. and as nothing is more dear to us than the loving conservation of our subjects hearts, what an undeserved doubt might we have incurred if the abusers of our liberality, the thrallers of our people, the wringers of the poor, had not been told us

this same period of economic and political uncertainty, however, produced an unsurpassed literary flowering in england. the first signs of a new literary movement had appeared at the end of the second decade of elizabeths reign, with john lylys euphues and edmund spensers the shepheardes calender in . during the s, some of the great names of english literature entered their maturity, including william shakespeare and christopher marlowe. continuing into the jacobean era, the english theatre would reach its peak. the notion of a great elizabethan era depends largely on the builders, dramatists, poets, and musicians who were active during elizabeths reign. they owed little directly to the queen, who was never a major patron of the arts.as elizabeth aged, her image gradually changed. she was portrayed as belphoebe or astraea, and after the armada, as gloriana, the eternally youthful faerie queene of edmund spensers poem. elizabeth gave edmund spenser a pension; as this was unusual for her, it indicates that she liked his work. her painted portraits became less realistic and more a set of enigmatic icons that made her look much younger than she was. in fact, her skin had been scarred by smallpox in , leaving her half bald and dependent on wigs and cosmetics. her love of sweets and fear of dentists contributed to severe tooth decay and loss to such an extent that foreign ambassadors had a hard time understanding her speech. andr hurault de maisse, ambassador extraordinary from henry iv of france, reported an audience with the queen, during which he noticed, her teeth are very yellow and unequal ... and on the left side less than on the right. many of them are missing, so that one cannot understand her easily when she speaks quickly. yet he added, her figure is fair and tall and graceful in whatever she does; so far as may be she keeps her dignity, yet humbly and graciously withal. walter raleigh called her a lady whom time had surprised.

the more elizabeths beauty faded, the more her courtiers praised it. elizabeth was happy to play the part, but it is possible that in the last decade of her life she began to believe her own performance. she became fond and indulgent of the charming but petulant young earl of essex, who was leicesters stepson and took liberties with her for which she forgave him. she repeatedly appointed him to military posts despite his growing record of irresponsibility. after essexs desertion of his command in ireland in , elizabeth had him placed under house arrest and the following year deprived him of his monopolies. in february , essex tried to raise a rebellion in london. he intended to seize the queen but few rallied to his support, and he was beheaded on  february. elizabeth knew that her own misjudgements were partly to blame for this turn of events. an observer wrote in  her delight is to sit in the dark, and sometimes with shedding tears to bewail essex.

elizabeths senior adviser, lord burghley, died on  august . his political mantle passed to his son robert, who soon became the leader of the government. one task he addressed was to prepare the way for a smooth succession. since elizabeth would never name her successor, robert cecil was obliged to proceed in secret. he therefore entered into a coded negotiation with james vi of scotland, who had a strong but unrecognised claim. cecil coached the impatient james to humour elizabeth and secure the heart of the highest, to whose sex and quality nothing is so improper as either needless expostulations or over much curiosity in her own actions. the advice worked. jamess tone delighted elizabeth, who responded so trust i that you will not doubt but that your last letters are so acceptably taken as my thanks cannot be lacking for the same, but yield them to you in grateful sort. in historian j. e. neales view, elizabeth may not have declared her wishes openly to james, but she made them known with unmistakable if veiled phrases.

the queens health remained fair until the autumn of , when a series of deaths among her friends plunged her into a severe depression. in february , the death of catherine carey, countess of nottingham, the niece of her cousin and close friend lady knollys, came as a particular blow. in march, elizabeth fell sick and remained in a settled and unremovable melancholy, and sat motionless on a cushion for hours on end. when robert cecil told her that she must go to bed, she snapped must is not a word to use to princes, little man. she died on  march  at richmond palace, between two and three in the morning. a few hours later, cecil and the council set their plans in motion and proclaimed james king of england.while it has become normative to record elizabeths death as occurring in , following english calendar reform in the s, at the time england observed new years day on  march, commonly known as lady day. thus elizabeth died on the last day of the year  in the old calendar. the modern convention is to use the old style calendar for the day and month while using the new style calendar for the year.

elizabeths coffin was carried downriver at night to whitehall, on a barge lit with torches. at her funeral on  april, the coffin was taken to westminster abbey on a hearse drawn by four horses hung with black velvet. in the words of the chronicler john stow

westminster was surcharged with multitudes of all sorts of people in their streets, houses, windows, leads and gutters, that came out to see the obsequy, and when they beheld her statue lying upon the coffin, there was such a general sighing, groaning and weeping as the like hath not been seen or known in the memory of man.

elizabeth was interred in westminster abbey, in a tomb shared with her halfsister, mary i. the latin inscription on their tomb, regno consortes  urna, hic obdormimus elizabetha et maria sorores, in spe resurrectionis, translates to consorts in realm and tomb, here we sleep, elizabeth and mary, sisters, in hope of resurrection.

elizabeth was lamented by many of her subjects, but others were relieved at her death. expectations of king james started high but then declined. by the s, there was a nostalgic revival of the cult of elizabeth. elizabeth was praised as a heroine of the protestant cause and the ruler of a golden age. james was depicted as a catholic sympathiser, presiding over a corrupt court. the triumphalist image that elizabeth had cultivated towards the end of her reign, against a background of factionalism and military and economic difficulties, was taken at face value and her reputation inflated. godfrey goodman, bishop of gloucester, recalled when we had experience of a scottish government, the queen did seem to revive. then was her memory much magnified. elizabeths reign became idealised as a time when crown, church and parliament had worked in constitutional balance.the picture of elizabeth painted by her protestant admirers of the early th century has proved lasting and influential. her memory was also revived during the napoleonic wars, when the nation again found itself on the brink of invasion. in the victorian era, the elizabethan legend was adapted to the imperial ideology of the day, and in the midth century, elizabeth was a romantic symbol of the national resistance to foreign threat. historians of that period, such as j. e. neale  and a. l. rowse , interpreted elizabeths reign as a golden age of progress. neale and rowse also idealised the queen personally she always did everything right; her more unpleasant traits were ignored or explained as signs of stress.recent historians, however, have taken a more complicated view of elizabeth. her reign is famous for the defeat of the armada, and for successful raids against the spanish, such as those on cdiz in  and , but some historians point to military failures on land and at sea. in ireland, elizabeths forces ultimately prevailed, but their tactics stain her record. rather than as a brave defender of the protestant nations against spain and the habsburgs, she is more often regarded as cautious in her foreign policies. she offered very limited aid to foreign protestants and failed to provide her commanders with the funds to make a difference abroad.elizabeth established an english church that helped shape a national identity and remains in place today. those who praised her later as a protestant heroine overlooked her refusal to drop all practices of catholic origin from the church of england. historians note that in her day, strict protestants regarded the acts of settlement and uniformity of  as a compromise. in fact, elizabeth believed that faith was personal and did not wish, as francis bacon put it, to make windows into mens hearts and secret thoughts.though elizabeth followed a largely defensive foreign policy, her reign raised englands status abroad. she is only a woman, only mistress of half an island, marvelled pope sixtus v, and yet she makes herself feared by spain, by france, by the empire, by all. under elizabeth, the nation gained a new selfconfidence and sense of sovereignty, as christendom fragmented. elizabeth was the first tudor to recognise that a monarch ruled by popular consent. she therefore always worked with parliament and advisers she could trust to tell her the trutha style of government that her stuart successors failed to follow. some historians have called her lucky; she believed that god was protecting her. priding herself on being mere english, elizabeth trusted in god, honest advice, and the love of her subjects for the success of her rule. in a prayer, she offered thanks to god that

at a time when wars and seditions with grievous persecutions have vexed almost all kings and countries round about me, my reign hath been peacable, and my realm a receptacle to thy afflicted church. the love of my people hath appeared firm, and the devices of my enemies frustrate.

abraham lincoln  was an american lawyer, politician, and statesman who served as the th president of the united states from  until his assassination in . lincoln led the union through the american civil war to defend the nation as a constitutional union and succeeded in defeating the insurgent confederacy, abolishing slavery, expanding the power of the federal government, and modernizing the u.s. economy.

lincoln was born into poverty in a log cabin in kentucky and was raised on the frontier, primarily in indiana. he was selfeducated and became a lawyer, whig party leader, illinois state legislator, and u.s. congressman from illinois. in , he returned to his successful law practice in springfield, illinois. in , he was angered by the kansasnebraska act, which opened the territories to slavery, causing him to reenter politics. he soon became a leader of the new republican party. he reached a national audience in the  senate campaign debates against stephen a. douglas. lincoln ran for president in , sweeping the north to gain victory. proslavery elements in the south viewed his election as a threat to slavery, and southern states began seceding from the nation. during this time, the newly formed confederate states of america began seizing federal military bases in the south. a little over one month after lincoln assumed the presidency, confederate forces attacked fort sumter, a u.s. fort in south carolina. following the bombardment, lincoln mobilized forces to suppress the rebellion and restore the union.

lincoln, a moderate republican, had to navigate a contentious array of factions with friends and opponents from both the democratic and republican parties. his allies, the war democrats and the radical republicans, demanded harsh treatment of the southern confederates. he managed the factions by exploiting their mutual enmity, carefully distributing political patronage, and by appealing to the american people. antiwar democrats  despised lincoln, and some irreconcilable proconfederate elements went so far as to plot his assassination. his gettysburg address came to be seen as one of the greatest and most influential statements of american national purpose. lincoln closely supervised the strategy and tactics in the war effort, including the selection of generals, and implemented a naval blockade of the souths trade. he suspended habeas corpus in maryland and elsewhere, and averted british intervention by defusing the trent affair. in , he issued the emancipation proclamation, which declared the slaves in the states in rebellion to be free. it also directed the army and navy to recognize and maintain the freedom of such persons, and to receive them into the armed service of the united states. lincoln pressured border states to outlaw slavery, and he promoted the thirteenth amendment to the u.s. constitution, which abolished slavery, except as punishment for a crime.

lincoln managed his own successful reelection campaign. he sought to heal the wartorn nation through reconciliation. on april , , just five days after the wars end at appomattox, he was attending a play at fords theatre in washington, d.c., with his wife, mary, when he was fatally shot by confederate sympathizer john wilkes booth. lincoln is remembered as a martyr and a national hero for his wartime leadership and for his efforts to preserve the union and abolish slavery. lincoln is often ranked in both popular and scholarly polls as the greatest president in american history.

abraham lincoln was born on february , , the second child of thomas lincoln and nancy hanks lincoln, in a log cabin on sinking spring farm near hodgenville, kentucky. he was a descendant of samuel lincoln, an englishman who migrated from hingham, norfolk, to its namesake, hingham, massachusetts, in . the family then migrated west, passing through new jersey, pennsylvania, and virginia. lincoln was also a descendant of the harrison family of virginia; his paternal grandfather and namesake, captain abraham lincoln and wife bathsheba  moved the family from virginia to jefferson county, kentucky. the captain was killed in an indian raid in . his children, including eightyearold thomas, abrahams father, witnessed the attack. thomas then worked at odd jobs in kentucky and tennessee before the family settled in hardin county, kentucky, in the early s.

lincolns mother nancy lincoln is widely assumed to be the daughter of lucy hanks. thomas and nancy married on june , , in washington county, and moved to elizabethtown, kentucky. they had three children sarah, abraham, and thomas, who died as an infant.thomas lincoln bought or leased farms in kentucky before losing all but  acres  of his land in court disputes over property titles. in , the family moved to indiana where the land surveys and titles were more reliable. indiana was a free  territory, and they settled in an unbroken forest in hurricane township, perry county, indiana. in , lincoln noted that the familys move to indiana was partly on account of slavery, but mainly due to land title difficulties.in kentucky and indiana, thomas worked as a farmer, cabinetmaker, and carpenter. at various times, he owned farms, livestock, and town lots, paid taxes, sat on juries, appraised estates, and served on county patrols. thomas and nancy were members of a separate baptists church, which forbade alcohol, dancing, and slavery.overcoming financial challenges, thomas in  obtained clear title to  acres  in indiana, an area which became the little pigeon creek community.

on october , , nancy lincoln died from milk sickness, leaving yearold sarah in charge of a household including her father, yearold abraham, and nancys yearold orphan cousin, dennis hanks. ten years later, on january , , sarah died while giving birth to a stillborn son, devastating lincoln.on december , , thomas married sarah bush johnston, a widow from elizabethtown, kentucky, with three children of her own. abraham became close to his stepmother and called her mother. lincoln disliked the hard labor associated with farm life. his family even said he was lazy, for all his reading, scribbling, writing, ciphering, writing poetry, etc.. his stepmother acknowledged he did not enjoy physical labor, but loved to read.

lincoln was largely selfeducated. his formal schooling was from itinerant teachers. it included two short stints in kentucky, where he learned to read but probably not to write, at age seven, and in indiana, where he went to school sporadically due to farm chores, for a total of fewer than  months in aggregate by the age of . he persisted as an avid reader and retained a lifelong interest in learning. family, neighbors, and schoolmates recalled that his reading included the king james bible, aesops fables, john bunyans the pilgrims progress, daniel defoes robinson crusoe, and the autobiography of benjamin franklin. despite being selfeducated, lincoln was the recipient of honorary degrees later in life, including an honorary doctor of laws from columbia university in june .

as a teen, lincoln took responsibility for chores and customarily gave his father all earnings from work outside the home until he was . lincoln was tall, strong, and athletic, and became adept at using an ax. he was an active wrestler during his youth and trained in the rough catchascatchcan style . he became county wrestling champion at the age of . he gained a reputation for strength and audacity after winning a wrestling match with the renowned leader of ruffians known as the clarys grove boys.

in march , fearing another milk sickness outbreak, several members of the extended lincoln family, including abraham, moved west to illinois, a free state, and settled in macon county. abraham then became increasingly distant from thomas, in part due to his fathers lack of education. in , as thomas and other family members prepared to move to a new homestead in coles county, illinois, abraham struck out on his own. he made his home in new salem, illinois, for six years. lincoln and some friends took goods, including live hogs, by flatboat to new orleans, louisiana, where he first witnessed slavery.

speculation persists that lincolns first romantic interest was ann rutledge, whom he met when he moved to new salem. witness testimony, given decades afterward, showed a lack of any specific recollection of a romance between the two. rutledge died on august , , most likely of typhoid fever; saying that he could not bear the idea of rain falling on anns grave, lincoln sunk into a serious episode of depression, and this gave rise to speculation that he had been in love with her.in the early s, he met mary owens from kentucky. late in , lincoln agreed to a match with owens if she returned to new salem. owens arrived that november and he courted her for a time; however, they both had second thoughts. on august , , he wrote owens a letter saying he would not blame her if she ended the relationship, and she never replied.in , lincoln met mary todd in springfield, illinois, and the following year they became engaged. she was the daughter of robert smith todd, a wealthy lawyer and businessman in lexington, kentucky. a wedding set for january , , was canceled at lincolns request, but they reconciled and married on november , , in the springfield mansion of marys sister. while anxiously preparing for the nuptials, he was asked where he was going and replied, to hell, i suppose. in , the couple bought a house in springfield near his law office. mary kept house with the help of a hired servant and a relative.lincoln was an affectionate husband and father of four sons, though his work regularly kept him away from home. the oldest, robert todd lincoln, was born in  and was the only child to live to maturity. edward baker lincoln , born in , died february , , probably of tuberculosis. lincolns third son, willie lincoln was born on december , , and died of a fever at the white house on february , . the youngest, thomas tad lincoln, was born on april , , and survived his father but died of heart failure at age  on july , . lincoln was remarkably fond of children and the lincolns were not considered to be strict with their own. in fact, lincolns law partner william h. herndon would grow irritated when lincoln brought his children to the law office. their father, it seemed, was often too absorbed in his work to notice his childrens behavior. herndon recounted, i have felt many and many a time that i wanted to wring their little necks, and yet out of respect for lincoln i kept my mouth shut. lincoln did not note what his children were doing or had done.the deaths of their sons, eddie and willie, had profound effects on both parents. lincoln suffered from melancholy, a condition now thought to be clinical depression. later in life, mary struggled with the stresses of losing her husband and sons, and robert committed her for a time to an asylum in .

during  and , lincoln worked at a general store in new salem, illinois. in , he declared his candidacy for the illinois house of representatives, but interrupted his campaign to serve as a captain in the illinois militia during the black hawk war. when lincoln returned home from the black hawk war, he planned to become a blacksmith, but instead formed a partnership with yearold william berry, with whom he purchased a new salem general store on credit. because a license was required to sell customers single beverages, berry obtained bartending licenses for  each for lincoln and himself, and in  the lincolnberry general store became a tavern as well. as licensed bartenders, lincoln and berry were able to sell spirits, including liquor, for  cents a pint. they offered a wide range of alcoholic beverages as well as food, including takeout dinners. but berry became an alcoholic, was often too drunk to work, and lincoln ended up running the store by himself. although the economy was booming, the business struggled and went into debt, causing lincoln to sell his share.

in his first campaign speech after returning from his military service, lincoln observed a supporter in the crowd under attack, grabbed the assailant by his neck and the seat of his trousers, and tossed him. in the campaign, lincoln advocated for navigational improvements on the sangamon river. he could draw crowds as a raconteur, but lacked the requisite formal education, powerful friends, and money, and lost the election. lincoln finished eighth out of  candidates , though he received  of the  votes cast in the new salem precinct.lincoln served as new salems postmaster and later as county surveyor, but continued his voracious reading and decided to become a lawyer. rather than studying in the office of an established attorney, as was the custom, lincoln borrowed legal texts from attorneys john todd stuart and thomas drummond, purchased books including blackstones commentaries and chittys pleadings, and read law on his own. he later said of his legal education that i studied with nobody.

lincolns second state house campaign in , this time as a whig, was a success over a powerful whig opponent. then followed his four terms in the illinois house of representatives for sangamon county. he championed construction of the illinois and michigan canal, and later was a canal commissioner. he voted to expand suffrage beyond white landowners to all white males, but adopted a free soil stance opposing both slavery and abolition. in , he declared, the institution of slavery is founded on both injustice and bad policy, but the promulgation of abolition doctrines tends rather to increase than abate its evils. he echoed henry clays support for the american colonization society which advocated a program of abolition in conjunction with settling freed slaves in liberia.he was admitted to the illinois bar on september , , and moved to springfield and began to practice law under john t. stuart, mary todds cousin. lincoln emerged as a formidable trial combatant during crossexaminations and closing arguments. he partnered several years with stephen t. logan, and in  began his practice with william herndon, a studious young man.on january , , abraham lincoln, then twentyeight years old, delivered his first major speech at the lyceum in springfield, illinois, after the murder of newspaper editor elijah parish lovejoy in alton. lincoln warned that no transatlantic military giant could ever crush us as a nation. it cannot come from abroad. if destruction be our lot, we must ourselves be its author and finisher, said lincoln. prior to that, on april , , an innocent black man, francis mcintosh, was burned alive in st. louis, missouri. zann gill describes how these two murders set off a chain reaction that ultimately prompted abraham lincoln to run for president.

true to his record, lincoln professed to friends in  to be an old line whig, a disciple of henry clay. their party favored economic modernization in banking, tariffs to fund internal improvements including railroads, and urbanization.in , lincoln sought the whig nomination for illinois th district seat in the u.s. house of representatives; he was defeated by john j. hardin though he prevailed with the party in limiting hardin to one term. lincoln not only pulled off his strategy of gaining the nomination in  but also won the election. he was the only whig in the illinois delegation, but as dutiful as any participated in almost all votes and made speeches that toed the party line. he was assigned to the committee on post office and post roads and the committee on expenditures in the war department. lincoln teamed with joshua r. giddings on a bill to abolish slavery in the district of columbia with compensation for the owners, enforcement to capture fugitive slaves, and a popular vote on the matter. he dropped the bill when it eluded whig support.

on foreign and military policy, lincoln spoke against the mexicanamerican war, which he imputed to president james k. polks desire for military glorythat attractive rainbow, that rises in showers of blood. he supported the wilmot proviso, a failed proposal to ban slavery in any u.s. territory won from mexico.lincoln emphasized his opposition to polk by drafting and introducing his spot resolutions. the war had begun with a killing of american soldiers by mexican cavalry patrol in disputed territory, and polk insisted that mexican soldiers had invaded our territory and shed the blood of our fellowcitizens on our own soil. lincoln demanded that polk show congress the exact spot on which blood had been shed and prove that the spot was on american soil. the resolution was ignored in both congress and the national papers, and it cost lincoln political support in his district. one illinois newspaper derisively nicknamed him spotty lincoln. lincoln later regretted some of his statements, especially his attack on presidential warmaking powers.lincoln had pledged in  to serve only one term in the house. realizing clay was unlikely to win the presidency, he supported general zachary taylor for the whig nomination in the  presidential election. taylor won and lincoln hoped in vain to be appointed commissioner of the general land office. the administration offered to appoint him secretary or governor of the oregon territory as consolation. this distant territory was a democratic stronghold, and acceptance of the post would have disrupted his legal and political career in illinois, so he declined and resumed his law practice.

in his springfield practice, lincoln handled every kind of business that could come before a prairie lawyer. twice a year he appeared for  consecutive weeks in county seats in the midstate county courts; this continued for  years. lincoln handled transportation cases in the midst of the nations western expansion, particularly river barge conflicts under the many new railroad bridges. as a riverboat man, lincoln initially favored those interests, but ultimately represented whoever hired him. he later represented a bridge company against a riverboat company in hurd v. rock island bridge company, a landmark case involving a canal boat that sank after hitting a bridge. in , he received a patent for a flotation device for the movement of boats in shallow water. the idea was never commercialized, but it made lincoln the only president to hold a patent.lincoln appeared before the illinois supreme court in  cases; he was sole counsel in  cases, of which  were decided in his favor. from  to , one of his largest clients was the illinois central railroad. his legal reputation gave rise to the nickname honest abe.lincoln argued in an  criminal trial, defending william duff armstrong, who was on trial for the murder of james preston metzker. the case is famous for lincolns use of a fact established by judicial notice to challenge the credibility of an eyewitness. after an opposing witness testified to seeing the crime in the moonlight, lincoln produced a farmers almanac showing the moon was at a low angle, drastically reducing visibility. armstrong was acquitted.leading up to his presidential campaign, lincoln elevated his profile in an  murder case, with his defense of simeon quinn peachy harrison who was a third cousin; harrison was also the grandson of lincolns political opponent, rev. peter cartwright. harrison was charged with the murder of greek crafton who, as he lay dying of his wounds, confessed to cartwright that he had provoked harrison. lincoln angrily protested the judges initial decision to exclude cartwrights testimony about the confession as inadmissible hearsay. lincoln argued that the testimony involved a dying declaration and was not subject to the hearsay rule. instead of holding lincoln in contempt of court as expected, the judge, a democrat, reversed his ruling and admitted the testimony into evidence, resulting in harrisons acquittal.

the debate over the status of slavery in the territories failed to alleviate tensions between the slaveholding south and the free north, with the failure of the compromise of , a legislative package designed to address the issue. in his  eulogy for clay, lincoln highlighted the latters support for gradual emancipation and opposition to both extremes on the slavery issue. as the slavery debate in the nebraska and kansas territories became particularly acrimonious, illinois senator stephen a. douglas proposed popular sovereignty as a compromise; the measure would allow the electorate of each territory to decide the status of slavery. the legislation alarmed many northerners, who sought to prevent the spread of slavery that could result, but douglass kansasnebraska act narrowly passed congress in may .lincoln did not comment on the act until months later in his peoria speech of october . lincoln then declared his opposition to slavery, which he repeated en route to the presidency. he said the kansas act had a declared indifference, but as i must think, a covert real zeal for the spread of slavery. i cannot but hate it. i hate it because of the monstrous injustice of slavery itself. i hate it because it deprives our republican example of its just influence in the world.... lincolns attacks on the kansasnebraska act marked his return to political life.nationally, the whigs were irreparably split by the kansasnebraska act and other efforts to compromise on the slavery issue. reflecting on the demise of his party, lincoln wrote in , i think i am a whig, but others say there are no whigs, and that i am an abolitionist.... i do no more than oppose the extension of slavery. the new republican party was formed as a northern party dedicated to antislavery, drawing from the antislavery wing of the whig party and combining free soil, liberty, and antislavery democratic party members, lincoln resisted early republican entreaties, fearing that the new party would become a platform for extreme abolitionists. lincoln held out hope for rejuvenating the whigs, though he lamented his partys growing closeness with the nativist know nothing movement.in , lincoln was elected to the illinois legislature but declined to take his seat. the years elections showed the strong opposition to the kansasnebraska act, and in the aftermath, lincoln sought election to the united states senate. at that time, senators were elected by the state legislature. after leading in the first six rounds of voting, he was unable to obtain a majority. lincoln instructed his backers to vote for lyman trumbull. trumbull was an antislavery democrat, and had received few votes in the earlier ballots; his supporters, also antislavery democrats, had vowed not to support any whig. lincolns decision to withdraw enabled his whig supporters and trumbulls antislavery democrats to combine and defeat the mainstream democratic candidate, joel aldrich matteson.

violent political confrontations in kansas continued, and opposition to the kansasnebraska act remained strong throughout the north. as the  elections approached, lincoln joined the republicans and attended the bloomington convention, which formally established the illinois republican party. the convention platform endorsed congresss right to regulate slavery in the territories and backed the admission of kansas as a free state. lincoln gave the final speech of the convention supporting the party platform and called for the preservation of the union. at the june  republican national convention, though lincoln received support to run as vice president, john c. frmont and william dayton comprised the ticket, which lincoln supported throughout illinois. the democrats nominated former secretary of state james buchanan and the knownothings nominated former whig president millard fillmore. buchanan prevailed, while republican william henry bissell won election as governor of illinois, and lincoln became a leading republican in illinois.

dred scott was a slave whose master took him from a slave state to a territory that was free as a result of the missouri compromise. after scott was returned to the slave state, he petitioned a federal court for his freedom. his petition was denied in dred scott v. sandford . in his opinion, supreme court chief justice roger b. taney wrote that black people were not citizens and derived no rights from the constitution, and that the missouri compromise was unconstitutional for infringing upon slave owners property rights. while many democrats hoped that dred scott would end the dispute over slavery in the territories, the decision sparked further outrage in the north. lincoln denounced it as the product of a conspiracy of democrats to support the slave power. he argued the decision was at variance with the declaration of independence; he said that while the founding fathers did not believe all men equal in every respect, they believed all men were equal in certain inalienable rights, among which are life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness.

in , douglas was up for reelection in the u.s. senate, and lincoln hoped to defeat him. many in the party felt that a former whig should be nominated in , and lincolns  campaigning and support of trumbull had earned him a favor. some eastern republicans supported douglas for his opposition to the lecompton constitution and admission of kansas as a slave state. many illinois republicans resented this eastern interference. for the first time, illinois republicans held a convention to agree upon a senate candidate, and lincoln won the nomination with little opposition.

lincoln accepted the nomination with great enthusiasm and zeal. after his nomination he delivered his house divided speech, with the biblical reference mark , a house divided against itself cannot stand. i believe this government cannot endure permanently half slave and half free. i do not expect the union to be dissolvedi do not expect the house to fallbut i do expect it will cease to be divided. it will become all one thing, or all the other. the speech created a stark image of the danger of disunion. the stage was then set for the election of the illinois legislature which would, in turn, select lincoln or douglas. when informed of lincolns nomination, douglas stated, lincoln is the strong man of the party ... and if i beat him, my victory will be hardly won.the senate campaign featured seven debates between lincoln and douglas. these were the most famous political debates in american history; they had an atmosphere akin to a prizefight and drew crowds in the thousands. the principals stood in stark contrast both physically and politically. lincoln warned that douglas slave power was threatening the values of republicanism, and accused douglas of distorting the founding fathers premise that all men are created equal. douglas emphasized his freeport doctrine, in which he said local settlers were free to choose whether to allow slavery within their territory, and accused lincoln of having joined the abolitionists. lincolns argument assumed a moral tone, as he claimed douglas represented a conspiracy to promote slavery. douglass argument was more legal in nature, claiming that lincoln was defying the authority of the u.s. supreme court as exercised in the dred scott decision.though the republican legislative candidates won more popular votes, the democrats won more seats, and the legislature reelected douglas. however, lincolns articulation of the issues had given him a national political presence. in may , lincoln purchased the illinois staatsanzeiger, a germanlanguage newspaper that was consistently supportive; most of the states , german americans voted for democrats, but the germanlanguage paper mobilized republican support. in the aftermath of the  election, newspapers frequently mentioned lincoln as a potential republican presidential candidate, rivaled by william h. seward, salmon p. chase, edward bates, and simon cameron. while lincoln was popular in the midwest, he lacked support in the northeast and was unsure whether to seek the office. in january , lincoln told a group of political allies that he would accept the presidential nomination if offered and, in the following months, several local papers endorsed his candidacy.over the coming months, lincoln was tireless, making nearly fifty speeches along the campaign trail. by the quality and simplicity of his rhetoric, he quickly became the champion of the republican party. however, despite his overwhelming support in the midwestern united states, he was less appreciated in the east. horace greeley, editor of the new york tribune, at that time wrote up an unflattering account of lincolns compromising position on slavery and his reluctance to challenge the courts dred scott ruling, which was promptly used against him by his political rivals.on february , , powerful new york republicans invited lincoln to give a speech at cooper union, in which he argued that the founding fathers of the united states had little use for popular sovereignty and had repeatedly sought to restrict slavery. he insisted that morality required opposition to slavery and rejected any groping for some middle ground between the right and the wrong. many in the audience thought he appeared awkward and even ugly. but lincoln demonstrated intellectual leadership, which brought him into contention. journalist noah brooks reported, no man ever before made such an impression on his first appeal to a new york audience.historian david herbert donald described the speech as a superb political move for an unannounced presidential aspirant. appearing in sewards home state, sponsored by a group largely loyal to chase, lincoln shrewdly made no reference to either of these republican rivals for the nomination. in response to an inquiry about his ambitions, lincoln said, the taste is in my mouth a little.

on may , , the illinois republican state convention was held in decatur. lincolns followers organized a campaign team led by david davis, norman judd, leonard swett, and jesse dubois, and lincoln received his first endorsement. exploiting his embellished frontier legend , lincolns supporters adopted the label of the rail candidate. in , lincoln described himself i am in height, six feet, four inches, nearly; lean in flesh, weighing, on an average, one hundred and eighty pounds; dark complexion, with coarse black hair, and gray eyes. michael martinez wrote about the effective imaging of lincoln by his campaign. at times he was presented as the plaintalking rail splitter and at other times he was honest abe, unpolished but trustworthy.on may , at the republican national convention in chicago, lincoln won the nomination on the third ballot, beating candidates such as seward and chase. a former democrat, hannibal hamlin of maine, was nominated for vice president to balance the ticket. lincolns success depended on his campaign team, his reputation as a moderate on the slavery issue, and his strong support for internal improvements and the tariff. pennsylvania put him over the top, led by the states iron interests who were reassured by his tariff support. lincolns managers had focused on this delegation while honoring lincolns dictate to make no contracts that will bind me.as the slave power tightened its grip on the national government, most republicans agreed with lincoln that the north was the aggrieved party. throughout the s, lincoln had doubted the prospects of civil war, and his supporters rejected claims that his election would incite secession. when douglas was selected as the candidate of the northern democrats, delegates from eleven slave states walked out of the democratic convention; they opposed douglass position on popular sovereignty, and selected incumbent vice president john c. breckinridge as their candidate. a group of former whigs and know nothings formed the constitutional union party and nominated john bell of tennessee. lincoln and douglas competed for votes in the north, while bell and breckinridge primarily found support in the south.prior to the republican convention, the lincoln campaign began cultivating a nationwide youth organization, the wide awakes, which it used to generate popular support throughout the country to spearhead voter registration drives, thinking that new voters and young voters tended to embrace new parties. people of the northern states knew the southern states would vote against lincoln and rallied supporters for lincoln.as douglas and the other candidates campaigned, lincoln gave no speeches, relying on the enthusiasm of the republican party. the party did the leg work that produced majorities across the north and produced an abundance of campaign posters, leaflets, and newspaper editorials. republican speakers focused first on the party platform, and second on lincolns life story, emphasizing his childhood poverty. the goal was to demonstrate the power of free labor, which allowed a common farm boy to work his way to the top by his own efforts. the republican partys production of campaign literature dwarfed the combined opposition; a chicago tribune writer produced a pamphlet that detailed lincolns life and sold ,, copies. though he did not give public appearances, many sought to visit him and write him. in the runup to the election, he took an office in the illinois state capitol to deal with the influx of attention. he also hired john george nicolay as his personal secretary, who would remain in that role during the presidency.on november , , lincoln was elected the th president. he was the first republican president and his victory was entirely due to his support in the north and west. no ballots were cast for him in  of the  southern slave states, and he won only two of  counties in all the southern states, an omen of the impending civil war. lincoln received ,, votes, or . of the total in a fourway race, carrying the free northern states, as well as california and oregon. his victory in the electoral college was decisive lincoln had  votes to  for his opponents.

the south was outraged by lincolns election, and in response secessionists implemented plans to leave the union before he took office in march . on december , , south carolina took the lead by adopting an ordinance of secession; by february , , florida, mississippi, alabama, georgia, louisiana, and texas followed. six of these states declared themselves to be a sovereign nation, the confederate states of america, and adopted a constitution. the upper south and border states  initially rejected the secessionist appeal. president buchanan and presidentelect lincoln refused to recognize the confederacy, declaring secession illegal. the confederacy selected jefferson davis as its provisional president on february , .attempts at compromise followed but lincoln and the republicans rejected the proposed crittenden compromise as contrary to the partys platform of freesoil in the territories. lincoln said, i will suffer death before i consent ... to any concession or compromise which looks like buying the privilege to take possession of this government to which we have a constitutional right.lincoln supported the corwin amendment to the constitution, which passed congress and was awaiting ratification by the states when lincoln took office. that doomed amendment would have protected slavery in states where it already existed. on march , , in his first inaugural address, lincoln said that, because he holds such a provision to now be implied constitutional law, i have no objection to its being made express and irrevocable. a few weeks before the war, lincoln sent a letter to every governor informing them congress had passed a joint resolution to amend the constitution.on february , , lincoln gave a particularly emotional farewell address upon leaving springfield; he would never again return to springfield alive. lincoln traveled east in a special train. due to secessionist plots, a thenunprecedented attention to security was given to him and his train. en route to his inauguration, lincoln addressed crowds and legislatures across the north. the presidentelect evaded suspected assassins in baltimore. on february , , he arrived in disguise in washington, d.c., which was placed under substantial military guard. lincoln directed his inaugural address to the south, proclaiming once again that he had no inclination to abolish slavery in the southern states

apprehension seems to exist among the people of the southern states, that by the accession of a republican administration, their property, and their peace, and personal security, are to be endangered. there has never been any reasonable cause for such apprehension. indeed, the most ample evidence to the contrary has all the while existed, and been open to their inspection. it is found in nearly all the published speeches of him who now addresses you. i do but quote from one of those speeches when i declare that i have no purpose, directly or indirectly, to interfere with the institution of slavery in the states where it exists. i believe i have no lawful right to do so, and i have no inclination to do so. lincoln cited his plans for banning the expansion of slavery as the key source of conflict between north and south, stating one section of our country believes slavery is right and ought to be extended, while the other believes it is wrong and ought not to be extended. this is the only substantial dispute. the president ended his address with an appeal to the people of the south we are not enemies, but friends. we must not be enemies.... the mystic chords of memory, stretching from every battlefield, and patriot grave, to every living heart and hearthstone, all over this broad land, will yet swell the chorus of the union, when again touched, as surely they will be, by the better angels of our nature. the failure of the peace conference of  signaled that legislative compromise was impossible. by march , no leaders of the insurrection had proposed rejoining the union on any terms. meanwhile, lincoln and the republican leadership agreed that the dismantling of the union could not be tolerated. in his second inaugural address, lincoln looked back on the situation at the time and said both parties deprecated war, but one of them would make war rather than let the nation survive, and the other would accept war rather than let it perish, and the war came.

major robert anderson, commander of the unions fort sumter in charleston, south carolina, sent a request for provisions to washington, and lincolns order to meet that request was seen by the secessionists as an act of war. on april , , confederate forces fired on union troops at fort sumter and began the fight. historian allan nevins argued that the newly inaugurated lincoln made three miscalculations underestimating the gravity of the crisis, exaggerating the strength of unionist sentiment in the south, and overlooking southern unionist opposition to an invasion.william tecumseh sherman talked to lincoln during inauguration week and was sadly disappointed at his failure to realize that the country was sleeping on a volcano and that the south was preparing for war. donald concludes that, his repeated efforts to avoid collision in the months between inauguration and the firing on ft. sumter showed he adhered to his vow not to be the first to shed fraternal blood. but he also vowed not to surrender the forts. the only resolution of these contradictory positions was for the confederates to fire the first shot; they did just that.on april , lincoln called on the states to send a total of , volunteer troops to recapture forts, protect washington, and preserve the union, which, in his view, remained intact despite the seceding states. this call forced states to choose sides. virginia seceded and was rewarded with the designation of richmond as the confederate capital, despite its exposure to union lines. north carolina, tennessee, and arkansas followed over the following two months. secession sentiment was strong in missouri and maryland, but did not prevail; kentucky remained neutral. the fort sumter attack rallied americans north of the masondixon line to defend the nation.

as states sent union regiments south, on april , baltimore mobs in control of the rail links attacked union troops who were changing trains. local leaders groups later burned critical rail bridges to the capital and the army responded by arresting local maryland officials. lincoln suspended the writ of habeas corpus in an effort to protect the troops trying to reach washington. john merryman, one maryland official hindering the u.s. troop movements, petitioned supreme court chief justice roger b. taney to issue a writ of habeas corpus. in june, in ex parte merryman, taney, not ruling on behalf of the supreme court, issued the writ, believing that article i, section  of the constitution authorized only congress and not the president to suspend it. but lincoln persisted with the policy of suspension in select areas.

lincoln took executive control of the war and shaped the union military strategy. he responded to the unprecedented political and military crisis as commanderinchief by exercising unprecedented authority. he expanded his war powers, imposed a blockade on confederate ports, disbursed funds before appropriation by congress, suspended habeas corpus, and arrested and imprisoned thousands of suspected confederate sympathizers. lincoln gained the support of congress and the northern public for these actions. lincoln also had to reinforce union sympathies in the border slave states and keep the war from becoming an international conflict.

it was clear from the outset that bipartisan support was essential to success, and that any compromise alienated factions on both sides of the aisle, such as the appointment of republicans and democrats to command positions. copperheads criticized lincoln for refusing to compromise on slavery. the radical republicans criticized him for moving too slowly in abolishing slavery. on august , , lincoln signed the confiscation act that authorized judicial proceedings to confiscate and free slaves who were used to support the confederates. the law had little practical effect, but it signaled political support for abolishing slavery.in august , general john c. frmont, the  republican presidential nominee, without consulting washington, issued a martial edict freeing slaves of the rebels. lincoln canceled the illegal proclamation as politically motivated and lacking military necessity. as a result, union enlistments from maryland, kentucky, and missouri increased by over ,.internationally, lincoln wanted to forestall foreign military aid to the confederacy. he relied on his combative secretary of state william seward while working closely with senate foreign relations committee chairman charles sumner. in the  trent affair, which threatened war with great britain, the u.s. navy illegally intercepted a british mail ship, the trent, on the high seas and seized two confederate envoys; britain protested vehemently while the u.s. cheered. lincoln ended the crisis by releasing the two diplomats. biographer james g. randall dissected lincolns successful techniques

his restraint, his avoidance of any outward expression of truculence, his early softening of state departments attitude toward britain, his deference toward seward and sumner, his withholding of his paper prepared for the occasion, his readiness to arbitrate, his golden silence in addressing congress, his shrewdness in recognizing that war must be averted, and his clear perception that a point could be clinched for americas true position at the same time that satisfaction was given to a friendly country.

lincoln painstakingly monitored the telegraph reports coming into the war department. he tracked all phases of the effort, consulting with governors, and selecting generals based on their success, their state, and their party. in january , after complaints of inefficiency and profiteering in the war department, lincoln replaced war secretary simon cameron with edwin stanton. stanton centralized the war departments activities, auditing and canceling contracts, saving the federal government ,,. stanton was a staunch unionist, probusiness, conservative democrat who gravitated toward the radical republican faction. he worked more often and more closely with lincoln than any other senior official. stanton and lincoln virtually conducted the war together, say thomas and hyman.lincolns war strategy embraced two priorities ensuring that washington was welldefended and conducting an aggressive war effort for a prompt, decisive victory. twice a week, lincoln met with his cabinet in the afternoon. occasionally mary prevailed on him to take a carriage ride, concerned that he was working too hard. for his edification lincoln relied upon a book by his chief of staff general henry halleck entitled elements of military art and science; halleck was a disciple of the european strategist antoinehenri jomini. lincoln began to appreciate the critical need to control strategic points, such as the mississippi river. lincoln saw the importance of vicksburg and understood the necessity of defeating the enemys army, rather than merely capturing territory.in directing the unions war strategy, lincoln valued the advice of gen. winfield scott, even after his retirement as commanding general of the united states army. on june , , president lincoln made an unannounced visit to west point, where he spent five hours consulting with scott regarding the handling of the civil war and the staffing of the war department.

after the union rout at bull run and winfield scotts retirement, lincoln appointed major general george b. mcclellan generalinchief. mcclellan then took months to plan his virginia peninsula campaign. mcclellans slow progress frustrated lincoln, as did his position that no troops were needed to defend washington. mcclellan, in turn, blamed the failure of the campaign on lincolns reservation of troops for the capital.

in , lincoln removed mcclellan for the generals continued inaction. he elevated henry halleck in july and appointed john pope as head of the new army of virginia. pope satisfied lincolns desire to advance on richmond from the north, thus protecting washington from counterattack. but pope was then soundly defeated at the second battle of bull run in the summer of , forcing the army of the potomac back to defend washington.despite his dissatisfaction with mcclellans failure to reinforce pope, lincoln restored him to command of all forces around washington. two days after mcclellans return to command, general robert e. lees forces crossed the potomac river into maryland, leading to the battle of antietam. that battle, a union victory, was among the bloodiest in american history; it facilitated lincolns emancipation proclamation in january.mcclellan then resisted the presidents demand that he pursue lees withdrawing army, while general don carlos buell likewise refused orders to move the army of the ohio against rebel forces in eastern tennessee. lincoln replaced buell with william rosecrans; and after the  midterm elections he replaced mcclellan with ambrose burnside. the appointments were both politically neutral and adroit on lincolns part.burnside, against presidential advice, launched an offensive across the rappahannock river and was defeated by lee at fredericksburg in december. desertions during  came in the thousands and only increased after fredericksburg, so lincoln replaced burnside with joseph hooker.in the  midterm elections the republicans suffered severe losses due to rising inflation, high taxes, rumors of corruption, suspension of habeas corpus, military draft law, and fears that freed slaves would come north and undermine the labor market. the emancipation proclamation gained votes for republicans in rural new england and the upper midwest, but cost votes in the irish and german strongholds and in the lower midwest, where many southerners had lived for generations.in the spring of  lincoln was sufficiently optimistic about upcoming military campaigns to think the end of the war could be near; the plans included attacks by hooker on lee north of richmond, rosecrans on chattanooga, grant on vicksburg, and a naval assault on charleston.hooker was routed by lee at the battle of chancellorsville in may, then resigned and was replaced by george meade. meade followed lee north into pennsylvania and beat him in the gettysburg campaign, but then failed to follow up despite lincolns demands. at the same time, grant captured vicksburg and gained control of the mississippi river, splitting the far western rebel states.

the federal governments power to end slavery was limited by the constitution, which before  was understood to reserve the issue to the individual states. lincoln believed that slavery would be rendered obsolete if its expansion into new territories were prevented, because these territories would be admitted to the union as free states, and free states would come to outnumber slave states. he sought to persuade the states to agree to compensation for emancipating their slaves. lincoln rejected major general john c. frmonts august  emancipation attempt, as well as one by major general david hunter in may , on the grounds that it was not within their power and might upset loyal border states enough for them to secede.in june , congress passed an act banning slavery on all federal territory, which lincoln signed. in july, the confiscation act of  was enacted, providing court procedures to free the slaves of those convicted of aiding the rebellion; lincoln approved the bill despite his belief that it was unconstitutional. he felt such action could be taken only within the war powers of the commanderinchief, which he planned to exercise. on july , , lincoln reviewed a draft of the emancipation proclamation with his cabinet.peace democrats  argued that emancipation was a stumbling block to peace and reunification, but republican editor horace greeley of the newyork tribune, in his public letter, the prayer of twenty millions, implored lincoln to embrace emancipation. in a public letter of august , , lincoln replied to greeley, writing that while he personally wished all men could be free, his first obligation as president was to preserve the union

my paramount object in this struggle is to save the union, and is not either to save or to destroy slavery. if i could save the union without freeing any slave i would do it, and if i could save it by freeing all the slaves i would do it; and if i could save it by freeing some and leaving others alone i would also do that. what i do about slavery, and the colored race, i do because i believe it helps to save the union; and what i forbear, i forbear because i do not believe it would help to save the union ...  i have here stated my purpose according to my view of official duty; and i intend no modification of my oftexpressed personal wish that all men everywhere could be free.

on september , , lincoln issued the preliminary emancipation proclamation, which announced that, in states still in rebellion on january , , the slaves would be freed. he spent the next  days, between september  and january , preparing the army and the nation for emancipation, while democrats rallied their voters by warning of the threat that freed slaves posed to northern whites. at the same time, during those  days, lincoln made efforts to end the war with slavery intact. but, on january , , keeping his word, lincoln issued the emancipation proclamation, freeing the slaves in  states not then under union control, with exemptions specified for areas under such control. lincolns comment on signing the proclamation was i never, in my life, felt more certain that i was doing right, than i do in signing this paper.with the abolition of slavery in the rebel states now a military objective, union armies advancing south enabled thousands of slaves to escape to freedom. the emancipation proclamation having stated that freedmen would be received into the armed service of the united states, enlisting these freedmen became official policy. by the spring of , lincoln was ready to recruit black troops in more than token numbers. in a letter to tennessee military governor andrew johnson encouraging him to lead the way in raising black troops, lincoln wrote, the bare sight of fifty thousand armed, and drilled black soldiers on the banks of the mississippi would end the rebellion at once. by the end of , at lincolns direction, general lorenzo thomas had enrolled twenty regiments of african americans from the mississippi valley.

lincoln spoke at the dedication of the gettysburg battlefield cemetery on november , . in  words, and three minutes, lincoln asserted that the nation was born not in , but in , conceived in liberty, and dedicated to the proposition that all men are created equal. he defined the war as dedicated to the principles of liberty and equality for all. he declared that the deaths of so many brave soldiers would not be in vain, that slavery would end, and the future of democracy would be assured, that government of the people, by the people, for the people, shall not perish from the earth.defying his prediction that the world will little note, nor long remember what we say here, the address became the most quoted speech in american history.

general ulysses grants victories at the battle of shiloh and in the vicksburg campaign impressed lincoln. responding to criticism of grant after shiloh, lincoln had said, i cant spare this man. he fights. with grant in command, lincoln felt the union army could advance in multiple theaters, while also including black troops. meades failure to capture lees army after gettysburg and the continued passivity of the army of the potomac persuaded lincoln to promote grant to supreme commander. grant then assumed command of meades army.lincoln was concerned that grant might be considering a presidential candidacy in . he arranged for an intermediary to inquire into grants political intentions, and once assured that he had none, lincoln promoted grant to the newly revived rank of lieutenant general, a rank which had been unoccupied since george washington. authorization for such a promotion with the advice and consent of the senate was provided by a new bill which lincoln signed the same day he submitted grants name to the senate. his nomination was confirmed by the senate on march , .grant in  waged the bloody overland campaign, which exacted heavy losses on both sides. when lincoln asked what grants plans were, the persistent general replied, i propose to fight it out on this line if it takes all summer. grants army moved steadily south. lincoln traveled to grants headquarters at city point, virginia, to confer with grant and william tecumseh sherman. lincoln reacted to union losses by mobilizing support throughout the north. lincoln authorized grant to target infrastructureplantations, railroads, and bridgeshoping to weaken the souths morale and fighting ability. he emphasized defeat of the confederate armies over destruction  for its own sake. lincolns engagement became distinctly personal on one occasion in  when confederate general jubal early raided washington, d.c. legend has it that while lincoln watched from an exposed position, union captain  oliver wendell holmes jr. shouted at him, get down, you damn fool, before you get shot but this story is commonly regarded as apocryphal.as grant continued to weaken lees forces, efforts to discuss peace began. confederate vice president stephens led a group meeting with lincoln, seward, and others at hampton roads. lincoln refused to negotiate with the confederacy as a coequal; his objective to end the fighting was not realized. on april , , grant nearly encircled petersburg in a siege. the confederate government evacuated richmond and lincoln visited the conquered capital. on april , lee surrendered to grant at appomattox, officially ending the war.

lincoln ran for reelection in , while uniting the main republican factions, along with war democrats edwin m. stanton and andrew johnson. lincoln used conversation and his patronage powersgreatly expanded from peacetimeto build support and fend off the radicals efforts to replace him. at its convention, the republicans selected johnson as his running mate. to broaden his coalition to include war democrats as well as republicans, lincoln ran under the label of the new union party.

grants bloody stalemates damaged lincolns reelection prospects, and many republicans feared defeat. lincoln confidentially pledged in writing that if he should lose the election, he would still defeat the confederacy before turning over the white house; lincoln did not show the pledge to his cabinet, but asked them to sign the sealed envelope. the pledge read as followsthis morning, as for some days past, it seems exceedingly probable that this administration will not be reelected. then it will be my duty to so cooperate with the president elect, as to save the union between the election and the inauguration; as he will have secured his election on such ground that he cannot possibly save it afterward.

the democratic platform followed the peace wing of the party and called the war a failure; but their candidate, mcclellan, supported the war and repudiated the platform. meanwhile, lincoln emboldened grant with more troops and republican party support. shermans capture of atlanta in september and david farraguts capture of mobile ended defeatism. the democratic party was deeply split, with some leaders and most soldiers openly for lincoln. the national union party was united by lincolns support for emancipation. state republican parties stressed the perfidy of the copperheads. on november , lincoln carried all but three states, including  percent of union soldiers.

on march , , lincoln delivered his second inaugural address. in it, he deemed the war casualties to be gods will. historian mark noll places the speech among the small handful of semisacred texts by which americans conceive their place in the world; it is inscribed in the lincoln memorial. lincoln said

fondly do we hopefervently do we praythat this mighty scourge of war may speedily pass away. yet, if god wills that it continue, until all the wealth piled by the bondmans  years of unrequited toil shall be sunk, and until every drop of blood drawn with the lash, shall be paid by another drawn with the sword, as was said , years ago, so still it must be said, the judgments of the lord, are true and righteous altogether. with malice toward none; with charity for all; with firmness in the right, as god gives us to see the right, let us strive on to finish the work we are in; to bind up the nations wounds; to care for him who shall have borne the battle, and for his widow, and his orphanto do all which may achieve and cherish a just and lasting peace, among ourselves, and with all nations.

reconstruction preceded the wars end, as lincoln and his associates considered the reintegration of the nation, and the fates of confederate leaders and freed slaves. when a general asked lincoln how the defeated confederates were to be treated, lincoln replied, let em up easy. lincoln was determined to find meaning in the war in its aftermath, and did not want to continue to outcast the southern states. his main goal was to keep the union together, so he proceeded by focusing not on whom to blame, but on how to rebuild the nation as one. lincoln led the moderates in reconstruction policy and was opposed by the radicals, under rep. thaddeus stevens, sen. charles sumner and sen. benjamin wade, who otherwise remained lincolns allies. determined to reunite the nation and not alienate the south, lincoln urged that speedy elections under generous terms be held. his amnesty proclamation of december , , offered pardons to those who had not held a confederate civil office and had not mistreated union prisoners, if they were willing to sign an oath of allegiance.

as southern states fell, they needed leaders while their administrations were restored. in tennessee and arkansas, lincoln respectively appointed johnson and frederick steele as military governors. in louisiana, lincoln ordered general nathaniel p. banks to promote a plan that would reestablish statehood when  percent of the voters agreed, and only if the reconstructed states abolished slavery. democratic opponents accused lincoln of using the military to ensure his and the republicans political aspirations. the radicals denounced his policy as too lenient, and passed their own plan, the  wadedavis bill, which lincoln vetoed. the radicals retaliated by refusing to seat elected representatives from louisiana, arkansas, and tennessee.lincolns appointments were designed to harness both moderates and radicals. to fill chief justice taneys seat on the supreme court, he named the radicals choice, salmon p. chase, who lincoln believed would uphold his emancipation and paper money policies.after implementing the emancipation proclamation, lincoln increased pressure on congress to outlaw slavery throughout the nation with a constitutional amendment. he declared that such an amendment would clinch the whole matter and by december  an amendment was brought to congress. the senate passed it on april , , but the first vote in the house of representatives fell short of the required twothirds majority. passage became part of lincolns reelection platform, and after his successful reelection, the second attempt in the house passed on january , . with ratification, it became the thirteenth amendment to the united states constitution on december , .lincoln believed the federal government had limited responsibility to the millions of freedmen. he signed senator charles sumners freedmens bureau bill that set up a temporary federal agency designed to meet the immediate needs of former slaves. the law opened land for a lease of three years with the ability to purchase title for the freedmen. lincoln announced a reconstruction plan that involved shortterm military control, pending readmission under the control of southern unionists.historians agree that it is impossible to predict how reconstruction would have proceeded had lincoln lived. biographers james g. randall and richard current, according to david lincove, argue that

it is likely that had he lived, lincoln would have followed a policy similar to johnsons, that he would have clashed with congressional radicals, that he would have produced a better result for the freedmen than occurred, and that his political skills would have helped him avoid johnsons mistakes.

eric foner argues that

unlike sumner and other radicals, lincoln did not see reconstruction as an opportunity for a sweeping political and social revolution beyond emancipation. he had long made clear his opposition to the confiscation and redistribution of land. he believed, as most republicans did in april , that the voting requirements should be determined by the states. he assumed that political control in the south would pass to white unionists, reluctant secessionists, and forwardlooking former confederates. but time and again during the war, lincoln, after initial opposition, had come to embrace positions first advanced by abolitionists and radical republicans. ... lincoln undoubtedly would have listened carefully to the outcry for further protection for the former slaves ... it is entirely plausible to imagine lincoln and congress agreeing on a reconstruction policy that encompassed federal protection for basic civil rights plus limited black suffrage, along the lines lincoln proposed just before his death.

lincolns experience with native americans started early with their killing of his grandfather in front of the family. later he served as a captain in the state militia during the black hawk war but saw no combat. during his presidency, his policy toward indians was based on politics. he used appointments to the indian bureau as a reward to supporters from minnesota and wisconsin. while in office his administration faced difficulties guarding western settlers, railroads, and telegraphs, from indian attacks.on august , , the sioux or dakota uprising broke out in minnesota. hundreds of settlers were killed, , were displaced from their homes, and washington was deeply alarmed. some feared incorrectly that it might represent a confederate conspiracy to start a war on the northwestern frontier. lincoln ordered thousands of confederate prisoners of war sent by railroad to put down the uprising. when the confederates protested forcing confederate prisoners to fight indians, lincoln revoked the policy and none set foot in minnesota. lincoln sent general john pope to minnesota as commander of the new department of the northwest a couple of weeks into the hostilities. before he arrived, the fond du lac band of chippewa sent lincoln a letter begging to go to war for the united states against the sioux, so lincoln could send minnesotas troops to fight the south. shortly after, a mille lacs band chief offered the same at st. cloud, minnesota. in it the chippewa specified that they wanted to use the indigenous rules of warfare. that meant there would be no prisoners of war, no surrender, no peace agreement. lincoln did not accept the chippewa offer, as he had no means to control the outcome and women and children were considered legitimate casualties in native american warfare. one of the chippewa signing the letter, chief nawgawnub, had received a presidential medal from lincoln earlier in the year.serving under gen. pope was minnesota congressman henry h. sibley. minnesotas governor had made sibley a colonel united states volunteers to command the us force tasked with fighting the war and that eventually defeated little crows forces at the battle of wood lake. 

the day the mdewakanton force surrendered at camp release, a chippewa war council met at minnesotas capitol with another chippewa offer to lincoln, to fight the sioux. sibley ordered a military commission to review that actions of the captured to try those that had committed war crimes. the legitimacy of military commissions trying opposing combatants had been established during the mexican war. sibley thought he had  to  of men he wanted for trial while gen. pope ordered that all detained warriors be tried. when it was done,  had been given death sentences that were subject to presidential review. lincoln ordered gen pope send all of the trial transcripts to washington where he and two of his staff pored over the trials. the lawyer in lincoln saw issues. he slowly realized that the trials could be divided into two groups combat between combatants and combat against civilians. the groups could be identified by their transcripts, the first group were all just three pages in length while the second group had more pages, some up to twelve. he placed  cases into the first group and commuted their sentences for the largest mass commutation in history. into the second group went forty. one he commuted for turning states witness. sibley dismissed another when overwhelming proof surfaced exonerating the man. the remaining  were executed in the largest mass hanging in u.s. history. very quickly questions arose concerning three of the executions that have not been answered. less than four months after the executions, lincoln issued general order  that relates more to the minnesota war than the civil war. now a congressman, alexander ramsey told lincoln, in , that he would have gotten more reelection support in minnesota had he executed all  of the mdewakanton. lincoln responded, i could not afford to hang men for votes. the men whose sentences he commuted were sent to a military prison at davenport, iowa. a few of those he had released due to the efforts of bishop henry whipple.

lincoln adhered to the whig theory of a presidency focused on executing laws while deferring to congress responsibility for legislating. lincoln vetoed only four bills, including the wadedavis bill with its harsh reconstruction program. the  homestead act made millions of acres of western governmentheld land available for purchase at low cost. the  morrill landgrant colleges act provided government grants for agricultural colleges in each state. the pacific railway acts of  and  granted federal support for the construction of the united states first transcontinental railroad, which was completed in . the passage of the homestead act and the pacific railway acts was enabled by the absence of southern congressmen and senators who had opposed the measures in the s.

in the selection and use of his cabinet, lincoln employed the strengths of his opponents in a manner that emboldened his presidency. lincoln commented on his thought process, we need the strongest men of the party in the cabinet. we needed to hold our own people together. i had looked the party over and concluded that these were the very strongest men. then i had no right to deprive the country of their services. goodwin described the group in her biography as a team of rivals.there were two measures passed to raise revenues for the federal government tariffs , and a federal income tax. in , lincoln signed the second and third morrill tariffs, following the first enacted by buchanan. he also signed the revenue act of , creating the first u.s. income taxa flat tax of  percent on incomes above  . the revenue act of  adopted rates that increased with income.the lincoln administration presided over the expansion of the federal governments economic influence in other areas. the national banking act created the system of national banks. the us issued paper currency for the first time, known as greenbacksprinted in green on the reverse side. in , congress created the department of agriculture.in response to rumors of a renewed draft, the editors of the new york world and the journal of commerce published a false draft proclamation that created an opportunity for the editors and others to corner the gold market. lincoln attacked the media for such behavior, and ordered a military seizure of the two papers which lasted for two days.

lincoln is largely responsible for the thanksgiving holiday. thanksgiving had become a regional holiday in new england in the th century. it had been sporadically proclaimed by the federal government on irregular dates. the prior proclamation had been during james madisons presidency  years earlier. in , lincoln declared the final thursday in november of that year to be a day of thanksgiving.in june , lincoln approved the yosemite grant enacted by congress, which provided unprecedented federal protection for the area now known as yosemite national park.

lincolns philosophy on court nominations was that we cannot ask a man what he will do, and if we should, and he should answer us, we should despise him for it. therefore we must take a man whose opinions are known. lincoln made five appointments to the supreme court. noah haynes swayne was an antislavery lawyer who was committed to the union. samuel freeman miller supported lincoln in the  election and was an avowed abolitionist. david davis was lincolns campaign manager in  and had served as a judge in the illinois court circuit where lincoln practiced. democrat stephen johnson field, a previous california supreme court justice, provided geographic and political balance. finally, lincolns treasury secretary, salmon p. chase, became chief justice. lincoln believed chase was an able jurist, would support reconstruction legislation, and that his appointment united the republican party.

lincoln named his main political rival, william h. seward, as secretary of state and left most diplomatic issues in his portfolio. however, lincoln did select some top diplomats as part of his patronage policy. he also closely watched the handling of the trent affair in late  to make sure there was no escalation into a war with britain. sewards main role was to keep britain and france from supporting the confederacy. he was successful after indicating to britain and france that the union would declare war on them if they supported the south.

john wilkes booth was a wellknown actor and a confederate spy from maryland; though he never joined the confederate army, he had contacts with the confederate secret service. after attending lincolns last public address, on april , , in which lincoln stated his preference that the franchise be conferred on some black men, specifically on the very intelligent, and on those who serve our cause as soldiers, booth hatched a plot to assassinate the president. when booth learned of the lincolns intent to attend a play with general grant, he planned to assassinate lincoln and grant at fords theatre. lincoln and his wife attended the play our american cousin on the evening of april , just five days after the union victory at the battle of appomattox courthouse. at the last minute, grant decided to go to new jersey to visit his children instead of attending the play.on april , , hours before he was assassinated, lincoln signed legislation establishing the united states secret service, and, at  in the evening, booth entered the back of lincolns theater box, crept up from behind, and fired at the back of lincolns head, mortally wounding him. lincolns guest, major henry rathbone, momentarily grappled with booth, but booth stabbed him and escaped. after being attended by doctor charles leale and two other doctors, lincoln was taken across the street to petersen house. after remaining in a coma for eight hours, lincoln died at  in the morning on april . stanton saluted and said, now he belongs to the ages. lincolns body was placed in a flagwrapped coffin, which was loaded into a hearse and escorted to the white house by union soldiers. president johnson was sworn in later that same day.two weeks later, booth, refusing to surrender, was tracked to a farm in virginia, and was mortally shot by sergeant boston corbett and died on april . secretary of war stanton had issued orders that booth be taken alive, so corbett was initially arrested to be court martialed. after a brief interview, stanton declared him a patriot and dismissed the charge.

the late president lay in state, first in the east room of the white house, and then in the capitol rotunda from april  to . the caskets containing lincolns body and the body of his son willie traveled for three weeks on the lincoln special funeral train. the train followed a circuitous route from washington d.c. to springfield, illinois, stopping at many cities for memorials attended by hundreds of thousands. many others gathered along the tracks as the train passed with bands, bonfires, and hymn singing or in silent grief. poet walt whitman composed when lilacs last in the dooryard bloomd to eulogize him, one of four poems he wrote about lincoln. african americans were especially moved; they had lost their moses. in a larger sense, the reaction was in response to the deaths of so many men in the war. historians emphasized the widespread shock and sorrow, but noted that some lincoln haters celebrated his death. lincolns body was buried at oak ridge cemetery in springfield and now lies within the lincoln tomb.

as a young man, lincoln was a religious skeptic. he was deeply familiar with the bible, quoting and praising it. he was private about his position on organized religion and respected the beliefs of others. he never made a clear profession of christian beliefs. throughout his public career, lincoln often quoted scripture. his three most famous speechesthe house divided speech, the gettysburg address, and his second inauguraleach contain direct allusions to providence and quotes from scripture.

in the s, lincoln subscribed to the doctrine of necessity, a belief that the human mind was controlled by a higher power. with the death of his son edward in  he more frequently expressed a dependence on god. he never joined a church, although he frequently attended first presbyterian church with his wife beginning in .in the s, lincoln asserted his belief in providence in a general way, and rarely used the language or imagery of the evangelicals; he regarded the republicanism of the founding fathers with an almost religious reverence. the death of his son willie in february  may have caused him to look toward religion for solace. after willies death, he questioned the divine necessity of the wars severity. he wrote at this time that god could have either saved or destroyed the union without a human contest. yet the contest began. and having begun, he could give the final victory to either side any day. yet the contest proceeds.

lincoln did believe in an allpowerful god that shaped events and by  was expressing that belief in major speeches. by the end of the war, he increasingly appealed to the almighty for solace and to explain events, writing on april , , to a newspaper editor in kentucky i claim not to have controlled events, but confess plainly that events have controlled me. now, at the end of three years struggle the nations condition is not what either party, or any man devised, or expected. god alone can claim it. whither it is tending seems plain. if god now wills the removal of a great wrong, and wills also that we of the north as well as you of the south, shall pay fairly for our complicity in that wrong, impartial history will find therein new cause to attest and revere the justice and goodness of god.this spirituality can best be seen in his second inaugural address, considered by some scholars as the greatest such address in american history, and by lincoln himself as his own greatest speech, or one of them at the very least. lincoln explains therein that the cause, purpose, and result of the war was gods will. lincolns frequent use of religious imagery and language toward the end of his life may have reflected his own personal beliefs or might have been a device to reach his audiences, who were mostly evangelical protestants. on the day lincoln was assassinated, he reportedly told his wife he desired to visit the holy land.

lincoln is believed to have had depression, smallpox, and malaria. he took blue mass pills, which contained mercury, to treat constipation. it is unknown to what extent this may have resulted in mercury poisoning.several claims have been made that lincolns health was declining before the assassination. these are often based on photographs of lincoln appearing to show weight loss and muscle wasting. it is also suspected that he might have had a rare genetic disease such as marfan syndrome or multiple endocrine neoplasia type b.

lincolns redefinition of republican values has been stressed by historians such as john patrick diggins, harry v. jaffa, vernon burton, eric foner, and herman j. belz. lincoln called the declaration of independencewhich emphasized freedom and equality for allthe sheet anchor of republicanism beginning in the s. he did this at a time when the constitution, which tolerated slavery, was the focus of most political discourse. diggins notes, lincoln presented americans a theory of history that offers a profound contribution to the theory and destiny of republicanism itself in the  cooper union speech. instead of focusing on the legality of an argument, he focused on the moral basis of republicanism.his position on war was founded on a legal argument regarding the constitution as essentially a contract among the states, and all parties must agree to pull out of the contract. furthermore, it was a national duty to ensure the republic stands in every state. many soldiers and religious leaders from the north, though, felt the fight for liberty and freedom of slaves was ordained by their moral and religious beliefs.as a whig activist, lincoln was a spokesman for business interests, favoring high tariffs, banks, infrastructure improvements, and railroads, in opposition to jacksonian democrats. lincoln shared the sympathies that the jacksonians professed for the common man, but he disagreed with the jacksonian view that the government should be divorced from economic enterprise. nevertheless, lincoln admired andrew jacksons steeliness as well as his patriotism. according to historian sean wilentz

just as the republican party of the s absorbed certain elements of jacksonianism, so lincoln, whose whiggery had always been more egalitarian than that of other whigs, found himself absorbing some of them as well. and some of the jacksonian spirit resided inside the lincoln white house.

william c. harris found that lincolns reverence for the founding fathers, the constitution, the laws under it, and the preservation of the republic and its institutions strengthened his conservatism. james g. randall emphasizes his tolerance and moderation in his preference for orderly progress, his distrust of dangerous agitation, and his reluctance toward ill digested schemes of reform. randall concludes that he was conservative in his complete avoidance of that type of socalled radicalism which involved abuse of the south, hatred for the slaveholder, thirst for vengeance, partisan plotting, and ungenerous demands that southern institutions be transformed overnight by outsiders.

in lincolns first inaugural address, he explored the nature of democracy. he denounced secession as anarchy, and explained that majority rule had to be balanced by constitutional restraints. he said a majority held in restraint by constitutional checks and limitations, and always changing easily with deliberate changes of popular opinions and sentiments, is the only true sovereign of a free people.the successful reunification of the states had consequences for how people viewed the country. the term the united states has historically been used sometimes in the plural  and other times in the singular. the civil war was a significant force in the eventual dominance of the singular usage by the end of the th century.

in his company, i was never reminded of my humble origin, or of my unpopular color.

in surveys of u.s. scholars ranking presidents conducted since , the top three presidents are lincoln, washington, and franklin delano roosevelt, although the order varies. between  and , lincoln, john f. kennedy, and ronald reagan were the topranked presidents in eight public opinion surveys, according to gallup. a  study found that scholars in the fields of history and politics ranked lincoln number one, while legal scholars placed him second after george washington.lincolns assassination left him a national martyr. he was viewed by abolitionists as a champion of human liberty. republicans linked lincolns name to their party. many, though not all, in the south considered lincoln as a man of outstanding ability. historians have said he was a classical liberal in the thcentury sense. allen c. guelzo states that lincoln was a classical liberal democratan enemy of artificial hierarchy, a friend to trade and business as ennobling and enabling, and an american counterpart to mill, cobden, and bright, whose portrait lincoln hung in his white house office.sociologist barry schwartz argues that lincolns american reputation grew slowly from the late th century until the progressive era , when he emerged as one of americas most venerated heroes, even among white southerners. the high point came in  with the dedication of the lincoln memorial on the national mall in washington, d.c.union nationalism, as envisioned by lincoln, helped lead america to the nationalism of theodore roosevelt, woodrow wilson, and franklin delano roosevelt. in the new deal era, liberals honored lincoln not so much as the selfmade man or the great war president, but as the advocate of the common man who they claimed would have supported the welfare state.schwartz argues that in the s and s the memory of abraham lincoln was practically sacred and provided the nation with a moral symbol inspiring and guiding american life. during the great depression, he argues, lincoln served as a means for seeing the worlds disappointments, for making its sufferings not so much explicable as meaningful. franklin d. roosevelt, preparing america for war, used the words of the civil war president to clarify the threat posed by germany and japan. americans asked, what would lincoln do however, schwartz also finds that since world war ii lincolns symbolic power has lost relevance, and this fading hero is symptomatic of fading confidence in national greatness. he suggested that postmodernism and multiculturalism have diluted greatness as a concept.in the cold war years, lincolns image shifted to a symbol of freedom who brought hope to those oppressed by communist regimes. he had long been known as the great emancipator, but, by the late s, some african american intellectuals, led by lerone bennett jr., denied that lincoln deserved that title. bennett won wide attention when he called lincoln a white supremacist in . he noted that lincoln used ethnic slurs and told jokes that ridiculed blacks. bennett argued that lincoln opposed social equality and proposed that freed slaves voluntarily move to another country. the emphasis shifted away from lincoln the emancipator to an argument that blacks had freed themselves from slavery, or at least were responsible for pressuring the government to emancipate them. defenders of lincoln, such as authors dirck and cashin, retorted that he was not as bad as most politicians of his day and that he was a moral visionary who deftly advanced the abolitionist cause, as fast as politically possible. dirck stated that few civil war scholars take bennett seriously, pointing to his narrow political agenda and faulty research.by the s, lincoln had become a hero to political conservativesapart from neoconfederates such as mel bradford, who denounced his treatment of the white southfor his intense nationalism, his support for business, his insistence on stopping the spread of slavery, his acting on lockean and burkean principles on behalf of both liberty and tradition, and his devotion to the principles of the founding fathers. lincoln became a favorite of liberal intellectuals across the world.barry schwartz wrote in  that lincolns image suffered erosion, fading prestige, benign ridicule in the late th century. on the other hand, donald opined in his  biography that lincoln was distinctly endowed with the personality trait of negative capability, defined by the poet john keats and attributed to extraordinary leaders who were content in the midst of uncertainties and doubts, and not compelled toward fact or reason.in the st century, president barack obama named lincoln his favorite president and insisted on using the lincoln bible for his inaugural ceremonies.lincoln has often been portrayed by hollywood, almost always in a flattering light.lincoln has been also admired by political figures outside the u.s., including german political theorist karl marx, indian independence leader mahatma gandhi, former liberian president ellen johnson sirleaf, and libyan revolutionary muammar gaddafi.

lincolns portrait appears on two denominations of united states currency, the penny and the  bill. his likeness also appears on many postage stamps. while he is usually portrayed bearded, he did not grow a beard until  at the suggestion of yearold grace bedell. he was the first of five presidents to do so.he has been memorialized in many town, city, and county names, including the capital of nebraska. the united states navy nimitzclass aircraft carrier uss abraham lincoln  is named after lincoln, the second navy ship to bear his name. the lincoln memorial is one of the most visited monuments in the nations capital and is one of the top five most visited national park service sites in the country. fords theatre, among the most visited sites in washington, d.c., is across the street from petersen house, where lincoln died. memorials in springfield, illinois, include the abraham lincoln presidential library and museum, lincolns home, and his tomb. a portrait carving of lincoln appears with those of three other presidents on mount rushmore, which receives about  million visitors a year. an influential statue of lincoln stands in lincoln park, chicago, with recastings given as diplomatic gifts standing in parliament square, london, and parque lincoln, mexico city.in , congress officially dedicated room h in the united states capitol to abraham lincoln. the room is located off national statuary hall and served as the post office of the house while thenrepresentative abraham lincoln served in congress from  to .







































willard carroll  smith ii  is an american actor, rapper and film producer. he has received multiple accolades, including an academy award, a bafta award, and four grammy awards. as of , his films have grossed over . billion globally, making him one of hollywoods most bankable stars.smith began his acting career starring as a fictionalized version of himself on the nbc sitcom the fresh prince of belair . he first gained recognition as part of a hip hop duo with dj jazzy jeff, with whom he released five studio albums and the us billboard hot  top  singles parents just dont understand, a nightmare on my street, summertime, ring my bell, and boom shake the room from  to . he released the solo albums big willie style , willennium , born to reign , and lost and found , which contained the us numberone singles gettin jiggy wit it and wild wild west. he has received four grammy awards for his rap performances.smith achieved wider fame as a leading man for the action film bad boys  and the science fiction comedy men in black ; he later reprised his role in several sequels. after starring in the thrillers independence day  and enemy of the state , he received academy award for best actor nominations for his portrayal as muhammad ali in ali , and as chris gardner in the pursuit of happyness . his other commercially successful films include i, robot , shark tale , hitch , i am legend , hancock , seven pounds , suicide squad  and aladdin .for his portrayal of richard williams in the biographical sports drama king richard , smith won the academy award for best actor. at the  ceremony, shortly before winning, smith faced backlash for slapping presenter chris rock after rock made an unscripted joke referencing smiths wife, jada pinkett smith. smith subsequently resigned from the academy and was banned from attending all their events for ten years.

willard carroll smith ii was born on september , , in philadelphia, to caroline , a school board administrator, and willard carroll smith sr., a us air force veteran and refrigeration engineer. his mother graduated from carnegie mellon university.he grew up in west philadelphias wynnefield neighborhood and was raised baptist. he has an elder sister named pamela and two younger siblings, twins harry and ellen. he attended our lady of lourdes, a private catholic elementary school in philadelphia, and overbrook high school. his parents separated when he was  and divorced around the year .smith began rapping at age . when his grandmother found a notebook of his lyrics, which he described as containing all his little curse words, she wrote him a note on a page in the book dear willard, truly intelligent people do not have to use words like this to express themselves. please show the world that youre as smart as we think you are. smith said that this influenced his decision not to use profanity in his music.

smith started as the mc of the hiphop duo dj jazzy jeff  the fresh prince, with his childhood friend jeffrey dj jazzy jeff townes as turntablist and producer. townes and smith were introduced to each other by chance in , as townes was performing at a house party only a few doors down from smiths residence, and he was missing his hype man. smith decided to fill in. they both felt strong chemistry, and townes was upset when his hype man finally made it to the party.soon after, the two decided to collaborate. smith enlisted a friend to join as the beatboxer of the group, clarence holmes aka ready rock c, making them a trio. philadelphiabased word records released their first single in  when ar man paul oakenfold introduced them to champion records with their single girls aint nothing but trouble, a tale of funny misadventures that landed smith and his former dj and rap partner mark forrest  in trouble. the song sampled the theme song of i dream of jeannie. smith became known for lighthearted storytelling raps and capable, though profanityfree, battle rhymes. the single became a hit a month before smith graduated from high school.based on this success, the duo were brought to the attention of jive records and russell simmons. the duos first album, rock the house, which was first released on word up in  debuted on jive in march . the group received the first grammy award for best rap performance in  for parents just dont understand , though their most successful single was summertime , which earned the group their second grammy and peaked at number  on the billboard hot . smith and townes are still friends and claim that they never split up, having made songs under smiths solo performer credit.smith spent money freely around  and  and underpaid his income taxes. the internal revenue service eventually assessed a . million tax debt against smith, took many of his possessions, and garnished his income. smith was struggling financially in  when the nbc television network signed him to a contract and built a sitcom, the fresh prince of belair, around him. the show was successful and began his acting career. smith set for himself the goal of becoming the biggest movie star in the world, studying box office successes common characteristics. in , smith was arrested in relation to an alleged assault on his record promoter, william hendricks; the charges were later dismissed.

smiths first major roles were in the drama six degrees of separation  and the action film bad boys  in which he starred opposite martin lawrence. the latter film was commercially successful, grossing . million worldwide. however, critical reception was generally mixed. in , smith starred as part of an ensemble cast in roland emmerichs independence day. the film was a massive blockbuster, becoming the second highestgrossing film in history at the time and establishing smith as a prime box office draw.in the summer of , he starred alongside tommy lee jones in the hit men in black, playing agent j. the film was released on july  by columbia pictures and grossed over . million worldwide against a  million budget, becoming the years third highestgrossing film, with an estimated ,, tickets sold in the us. it received positive reviews, with critics praising its humor, as well as joness and smiths performances.

during the summer of , smith also began his solo music career with the release of men in black, the theme song for the film, which topped singles charts in several regions across the world, including the uk. men in black  was later included on smiths debut solo album big willie style, which reached the top ten of the us billboard  and was certified nine times platinum by the recording industry association of america . the third single from the album, gettin jiggy wit it, became smiths first billboard hot  number one when it was released in .

in , smith starred with gene hackman in enemy of the state. the following year he turned down the role of neo in the matrix in favor of wild wild west . despite the disappointment of wild wild west, smith said that he has no regrets about his decision, asserting that keanu reevess performance as neo was superior to what smith himself would have achieved, although in interviews subsequent to the release of wild wild west he said that he made a mistake on wild wild west. that could have been better.smiths second album was again supported by the release of a film theme song as the lead single wild wild west, featuring dru hill and kool moe dee, topped the billboard hot  and was certified gold by the riaa. the album in question, willennium, reached number five on the billboard  and was certified double platinum by the riaa. will k, the second single from the album, reached number  on the billboard hot . before the end of , a video album was released featuring smiths seven music videos released to date, which reached number  on the uk music video chart. the same year, he was also featured on the fresh prince of belair costar tatyana alis single boy you knock me out, which reached number three on the uk singles chart and topped the uk rb singles chart.smith portrayed heavyweight boxer muhammad ali in the  biopic ali. for his performance he was nominated for the academy award for best actor, and the golden globe award for best actor  motion picture drama. in , following a fouryear musical hiatus, smith returned with his third album born to reign, which reached number  on the billboard  and was certified gold by the riaa. the albums lead single was the theme song from smiths film men in black ii, called black suits comin , which reached number three on the uk singles chart. later in the year, smiths first compilation album greatest hits was released, featuring songs from his three solo albums as well as those produced with dj jazzy jeff. saw smith return for bad boys ii, the sequel to the  film bad boys; the film follows detectives burnett and lowrey investigating the flow of ecstasy into miami. despite receiving generally negative reviews, the film was a boxoffice success, grossing  million worldwide. in the following year, he starred in the science fiction film i, robot and the animated film shark tale; both films were box office successes despite mixed reviews. smiths latest album lost and found was released in , peaking at number six on the billboard . lead single switch reached the top ten of both the billboard hot  and the uk singles chart. in , smith was entered into the guinness book of world records for attending three premieres in a hour time span. smith and his son jaden played father and son in the  biographical drama the pursuit of happyness. in the film smith portrays chris gardner. smith first became interested in making a film about gardner after seeing him on / and connected with him during production. the film, along with smiths performance, received praise.

on december , , smith was honored at graumans chinese theatre on hollywood boulevard. smith left an imprint of his hands and feet outside the theater in front of many fans. later that month, smith starred in the film i am legend, released on december , . alongside marginally positive reviews, its opening was the largest ever for a film released in the united states during december. smith himself has said that he considers the film to be aggressively unique. a reviewer said that the films commercial success cemented smiths standing as the number one box office draw in hollywood. on december , , tv guide reported that smith was selected as one of americas top ten most fascinating people of  for a barbara walters abc special that aired on december , .

in , smith was reported to be developing a film entitled the last pharaoh, in which he would be starring as taharqa. smith later starred in the superhero movie hancock, which grossed ,, in the united states and canada and had a worldwide total of ,,. on august , , it was announced that smith returned to the studio with producer la mar edwards to work on his fifth studio album.smith again reprised his role as agent j with men in black , which opened on may , , his first major starring role in four years. after the release of the film, smith was content with ending his work with the franchise, saying, i think three is enough for me. three of anything is enough for me. well look at it and well consider it, but it feels like that it might be time to let someone else do that. men in black , released ten years after men in black ii , grossed over  million worldwide. unadjusted for inflation, it is the highestgrossing film in the series.in , smith starred in after earth with his son jaden. the film was a disappointment at the domestic box office and was panned critically. calling the film the most painful failure in my career, smith ended up taking a year and a half break as a result.

smith starred opposite margot robbie in the romance drama focus, released on february , . he played nicky spurgeon, a veteran con artist who takes a young, attractive woman under his wing. smith was set to star in the scifi thriller brilliance, an adaptation of marcus sakeys novel of the same name scripted by jurassic park writer david koepp, but he left the project to work on the ridley scottproduced sports drama concussion.in concussion, smith played dr. bennet omalu of the brain injury research institute, the first to discover chronic traumatic encephalopathy. smith reported he had doubts about the film early in the production, saying, some of my happiest memories are of watching my son catch and throw a football. i didnt want to be the guy who did a movie saying football could be dangerous. these views subsided when he met omalu, whose words about american ideals resonated with smith. smiths performance was praised for being sensitive and understated.in , smith played deadshot in the supervillain teamup action film suicide squad. smiths participation in the film meant choosing it over a role in independence day resurgence, which he said would be like clinging and clawing backwards. while suicide squad was a massive financial success, earning over  million at the box office, the film received negative reviews from critics. christopher orr, film critic from the atlantic wrote that the latest offering from the dc comics superhero universe may be the most disastrous yet. later that year, smith starred in director david frankels drama collateral beauty, playing a new york advertising executive who succumbs to a deep depression after a personal tragedy. weeks after signing smith onto the film, his father was diagnosed with cancer, from which he died in . as part of his role required him to read about religion and the afterlife, he was brought closer to the elder smith, calling the experience a beautiful way to prepare for a movie and an even more majestic way to say goodbye to my father. the film marked the lowest box office opening of will smiths career. the film also received near universal negative reviews from film critics. hollywood reporter critic david rooney criticized smiths performance writing as the least interesting component in a madly overqualified cast.his film bright was distributed via netflix on december , . an urban fantasy, it was the most expensive film for netflix to date. smith collaborated with his director from suicide squad, david ayer. this would also be another critical disappointment for smith, with critics panning the movie. richard roeper of the chicago suntimes criticized the film and smiths performance writing, by the time will smith barks the line, dude, you cant go through elf town with  percent urgency and sincerity in the mindboggling mess that is bright, its clear we are watching a truly terrible, mountainous pile of genreblending garbage.also in , smith released the song get lit a collaboration between him and his former group mate jazzy jeff and launched his own youtube channel, which as of july  has over  million subscribers and  million total views.

smith performed the official song live it up alongside american singer nicky jam and kosovar singer era istrefi at the closing ceremony of the  fifa world cup in moscow, russia. that september, smith appeared, alongside bad bunny, on the marc anthony song est rico.smith portrayed the genie  in the liveaction adaptation of disneys aladdin, directed by guy ritchie. he also participated in the soundtracks by recording singles arabian nights , friend like me and prince ali. the film was released on may , . aladdin grossed over  billion worldwide to become smiths highestgrossing film, surpassing independence day. smith was also featured on rapper logics song dont be afraid to be different , from his fifth studio album confessions of a dangerous mind.smith appeared as an assassin who faces off against a younger clone of himself in ang lees gemini man, released on october , . the film was a box office bomb and received negative reviews from critics. varietys peter debruge called the film a highconcept misfire and wrote in practice, its been a nearly impossible project to get made, passing through the hands of countless actors and falling through multiple times because the technology wasnt there yet. at least, thats been the excuse, although judging by the finished product, it was the script that never lived up to the promise of its premise.later that year, smith had his second starring role in an animated film, in spies in disguise, opposite tom holland. smith voiced lance sterling, a spy who teams up with the nerdy inventor who creates his gadgets . in , he reteamed with martin lawrence for the third film in their franchise, bad boys for life. in , smith invested  million in esports organization gen.g with smiths dreamers fund, which he cofounded with keisuke honda. in june , it was announced that smith would star in emancipation, directed by antoine fuqua, in which he portrays peter, a runaway slave, who outsmarts hunters and the louisiana swamp on a journey to the union army.

smiths memoir will, which was written with mark manson, the author of the subtle art of not giving a fck, was published on november , , and promoted with a tour. the book is a journey of selfknowledge recalling childhood traumas, his relationship with his father, and his experiences with ayahuasca. in the same year, he and his westbrook studios company signed a deal with national geographic.smith portrayed richard williams, father and coach of tennis players venus and serena williams, in the  film king richard. for his performance, he won the academy award for best actor, golden globe award for best actor  motion picture drama, and the screen actors guild award for outstanding performance by a male actor in a leading role.on february , , national geographic announced that smith would star in a series titled pole to pole, which will stream on disney. the show will follow smith and his film crew as they go on a ,mile  trek from the south pole to the north pole, crossing all of earths biomes and spending time in communities along the way.

during the th academy awards on march , , smith walked onstage and slapped presenter and comedian chris rock who had made a joke about his wife jada pinkett smiths shaved head with a reference to the main protagonist in the film g.i. jane. smith then returned to his seat and yelled at rock, twice saying keep my wifes name out your fucking mouth pinkett smith had been diagnosed with alopecia areata in  and would later shave her head due to the condition. the academy of motion picture arts and sciences  said that smith was asked to leave the ceremony but he refused. later in the night, smith was named best actor for king richard and apologized to the academy and the other nominees, but not to rock, in his acceptance speech. following public backlash, smith issued a formal apology via a public instagram post. abc, ampas, and the screen actors guild condemned smith following the incident, prompting an investigation by the academys board of governors. rock declined to press charges against smith, according to the los angeles police department. on april , , smith tendered his resignation from the academy, writing in part

i deprived other nominees and winners of their opportunity to celebrate and be celebrated for their extraordinary work. i am heartbroken. i want to put the focus back on those who deserve attention for their achievements and allow the academy to get back to the incredible work it does to support creativity and artistry in film. so, i am resigning from membership in the academy of motion picture arts and sciences, and will accept any further consequences the board deems appropriate.

the ampas president david rubin accepted the resignation in an official statement but said they would continue their investigation. smiths resignation means he is no longer able to vote on oscar nominations as a member of the academy. commentators have speculated that smiths resignation from the academy and other related fallout from the slap would damage his family brand.on april , , the academy announced its decision to ban smith from future oscars galas and associated events for a period of  years. several film projects that smith had been involved in were put on hold as a result of the controversy. in a statement to cnn, smith stated i accept and respect the academys decision. smith offered an on camera apology on july , saying he was deeply remorseful for his actions.

smith married sheree zampino in . their son willard carroll trey smith iii was born on november , . the two divorced in . trey appeared in his fathers music video for the  single just the two of us. he also acted in two episodes of the sitcom all of us, and has appeared on the oprah winfrey show and the david blaine real or magic tv special.during the lates, smith confirmed he briefly dated sandra denton, better known as pepa of the hiphop group saltnpepa.smith married actress jada koren pinkett on december , . they met when pinkett auditioned for a role as smiths characters girlfriend in the fresh prince of belair. the pair produce films through their joint production company overbrook entertainment and westbrook inc. together they have two children jaden christopher syre smith , his costar in the pursuit of happyness and after earth; and willow camille reign smith , who appeared as his daughter in i am legend.

smith and his wife jada have expressed unconventional practices in their marriage, jokingly calling their commitment bad marriage for life. both he and pinkett smith have admitted to having extramarital relationships and believing in the freedom to pursue them. smith has said he wanted a polyamorous relationship with actress halle berry and ballerina misty copeland but ultimately abandoned the idea after therapy.in october , pinkett smith stated that she and smith had been separated since , though they have no intention to legally divorce.

smith and his brother harry own treyball development inc., a beverly hillsbased company named after trey smith, and his family resides in los angeles, california. in , smith celebrated his th birthday by performing a bungee jump from a helicopter in the grand canyon. smith was insured by lloyds of london for  million for the jump, which raised money for the charity global citizen.

smith was raised in a baptist household and attended a baptist church and catholic school. in a  interview, he said he did not identify as religious. in , smith said in an interview with the christian post that his christian faith, which was instilled in him by his grandmother, helped him to accurately portray bennet omalu in concussion, saying she was my spiritual teacher, she was that grandmother at the church, the one having the kids doing the easter presentations and putting on the christmas plays and her kids and grandkids had to be first. she was the most spiritually certain person that i had ever met in my entire life. even to the point that when she was dying she was happy, like she was really excited about going to heaven. in , smith performed the hindu rite of abhisheka of shiva at haridwar, india. he also performed an arti of the holy river ganga. he has said that he feels a deep connection to hindu spirituality and indian astrology. smith and his family also met and spent time with the indian spiritual leader sadhguru, stating that he enjoyed the heartfelt conversations between them.smith donated , to the  presidential campaign of democrat barack obama. on december , , smith and his wife hosted the nobel peace prize concert in oslo, norway, to celebrate obamas winning of the prize. in , smith said he supported legalizing samesex marriage. in , smith announced that production of his upcoming film, emancipation, was being pulled from the u.s. state of georgia because of the recent passage of the election integrity act of , which critics viewed as a restrictive voting law, negatively impacting nonwhite voters. smith and director antoine fuqua released a joint statement we cannot in good conscience provide economic support to a government that enacts regressive voting laws that are designed to restrict voter access.

smith has often been noted for achieving groundbreaking success throughout his musical career, and with his work as an actor in television and film. he has been cited as one of the greatest actors of his generation by several publications. forbes referred to him as the biggest movie star of the post/ era. his transition from music to acting has influenced multiple rappers to also become actors, with him being cited as a pioneer for the rappers crossing over into acting by complex. in , time named him one of the  most influential people in the world; in , esquire named him one of the  most influential people of the st century.music

his work as a member of dj jazzy jeff  the fresh prince made them the first rap act to win a grammy award, as well as the first to win an mtv video music award for best rap video, when the song parents just dont understand won in the inaugural rap categories at both award show ceremonies. xxl has referred to him as one of the most important rappers of all time. as of , his debut solo album big willie style  is among the bestselling rap albums of all time. television 

smith launched his acting career by starring in the nbc sitcom the fresh prince of belair; the shows success is considered to be a watershed moment for hiphop and black television, with many publications referring to it as one of the greatest sitcoms of all time. professor andrew horton said, smiths genre of comedy, popularized on the sitcom fresh prince of belair translated well into commercial boxoffice appeal. the fresh prince watered down and capitalized upon the then growing popularity of hip hop and almost anticipated its dominance on the american scene.moreover, author willie tolliver noted, what the fresh prince did accomplish was to put smith and his character will into an environment of affluence and possibility, thus changing the terms of his own black identity. this social and cultural mobility is central to smiths racial significance, and this will become evident again and again; he moves the image of the black male into unaccustomed spaces just as smith himself was in the process of conquering hollywood. film 

after starring in his debut film where the day takes you , smith quickly became one of hollywoods most successful and bankable stars. he currently holds the record for the most consecutive millionplus hits at the us box office, with eight. smith starred as daryl in the movie bright , which broke the record at the time for the mostviewed netflix film ever for its first week, and became the first major hollywood film to skip theatrical release over streaming platform for simultaneous viewing by more than  million people worldwide.for his role as agent j in men in black  , smith earned the highestpaid movie role of all time, when he reportedly earned  million for his role in the film; furthermore his roles in the movies king richard and bright are also among the highestpaid roles of all time. his film emancipation  was sold to apple studios for  million in june , which made it the largest film festival acquisition deal in film history. in , smith became the fifth black actor to win the academy award for best actor behind sidney poitier, denzel washington, jamie foxx, and forest whitaker.

big willie style 

willennium 

born to reign 

lost and found 

smith has received multiple awards throughout his career, including an academy award for best actor for his role as richard williams, the prolific father and coach to championship tennis players venus and serena williams, in the biopic king richard a role that also won him a golden globe award, bafta award and screen actors guild award in the same category; he also received a producer nomination for the academy award for best picture. prior to this award, he had been nominated several times for the academy award , the golden globe award , and the screen actors guild award . in , he received the honorary csar award; that same year, he was nominated for the tony award for best musical for fela; and in , he was nominated as a producer of cobra kai for the primetime emmy award for outstanding comedy series.

aside from acting and behindthescenes work on screen and stage, smith has made ventures into hip hop with the release of several songs, four of which won him grammy awardsone for best rap performance , one for best rap performance by a duo or group , and two for best rap solo performance ; the former two of which he won as a member of the duo dj jazzy jeff  the fresh prince.

his emmy, grammy, oscar and tony award nominations make him one of few black actors to be nominated for all four major entertainment awards in the us.

japan  is an island country in east asia. it is in the northwest pacific ocean and is bordered on the west by the sea of japan, extending from the sea of okhotsk in the north toward the east china sea, philippine sea, and taiwan in the south. japan is a part of the ring of fire, and spans an archipelago of , islands, with the five main islands being hokkaido, honshu , shikoku, kyushu, and okinawa. tokyo is the nations capital and largest city, followed by yokohama, osaka, nagoya, sapporo, fukuoka, kobe, and kyoto.

japan has over  million inhabitants and is the th most populous country in the world, as well as one of the most densely populated. about threefourths of the countrys terrain is mountainous, concentrating its highly urbanized population on narrow coastal plains. japan is divided into  administrative prefectures and eight traditional regions. the greater tokyo area is the most populous metropolitan area in the world. japan has the worlds highest life expectancy, though it is experiencing a population decline due to its very low birth rate.

japan has been inhabited since the upper paleolithic period . between the fourth and ninth centuries, the kingdoms of japan became unified under an emperor and the imperial court based in heianky. beginning in the th century, political power was held by a series of military dictators  and feudal lords , and enforced by a class of warrior nobility . after a centurylong period of civil war, the country was reunified in  under the tokugawa shogunate, which enacted an isolationist foreign policy. in , a united states fleet forced japan to open trade to the west, which led to the end of the shogunate and the restoration of imperial power in . in the meiji period, the empire of japan adopted a westernmodeled constitution and pursued a program of industrialization and modernization. amidst a rise in militarism and overseas colonization, japan invaded china in  and entered world war ii as an axis power in . after suffering defeat in the pacific war and two atomic bombings, japan surrendered in  and came under a sevenyear allied occupation, during which it adopted a new constitution.

under the  constitution, japan has maintained a unitary parliamentary constitutional monarchy with a bicameral legislature, the national diet. japan is a developed country and a great power, with one of the largest economies by nominal gdp. japan has renounced its right to declare war, though it maintains a selfdefense force that ranks as one of the worlds strongest militaries. a global leader in the automotive, robotics, and electronics industries, the country has made significant contributions to science and technology, and is one of the worlds largest exporters and importers. it is part of multiple major international and intergovernmental institutions.

japan is considered a cultural superpower as the culture of japan is well known around the world, including its art, cuisine, film, music, and popular culture, which encompasses prominent manga, anime, and video game industries.

the name for japan in japanese is written using the kanji  and is pronounced nippon or nihon. before  was adopted in the early th century, the country was known in china as wa  and in japan by the endonym yamato. nippon, the original sinojapanese reading of the characters, is favored for official uses, including on japanese banknotes and postage stamps. nihon is typically used in everyday speech and reflects shifts in japanese phonology during the edo period. the characters  mean sun origin, which is the source of the popular western epithet land of the rising sun.the name japan is based on chinese pronunciations of  and was introduced to european languages through early trade. in the th century, marco polo recorded the early mandarin or wu chinese pronunciation of the characters  as cipangu. the old malay name for japan, japang or japun, was borrowed from a southern coastal chinese dialect and encountered by portuguese traders in southeast asia, who brought the word to europe in the early th century. the first version of the name in english appears in a book published in , which spelled the name as giapan in a translation of a  portuguese letter.

a paleolithic culture from around , bc constitutes the first known habitation of the islands of japan. this was followed from around , bc  by a mesolithic to neolithic semisedentary huntergatherer culture characterized by pit dwelling and rudimentary agriculture. clay vessels from the period are among the oldest surviving examples of pottery. from around  bc, the japonicspeaking yayoi people began to enter the archipelago from the korean peninsula, intermingling with the jmon; the yayoi period saw the introduction of practices including wetrice farming, a new style of pottery, and metallurgy from china and korea. according to legend, emperor jimmu  founded a kingdom in central japan in  bc, beginning a continuous imperial line.japan first appears in written history in the chinese book of han, completed in  ad. buddhism was introduced to japan from baekje  in , but the development of japanese buddhism was primarily influenced by china. despite early resistance, buddhism was promoted by the ruling class, including figures like prince shtoku, and gained widespread acceptance beginning in the asuka period .in , the government led by prince naka no e and fujiwara no kamatari devised and implemented the farreaching taika reforms. the reform began with land reform, based on confucian ideas and philosophies from china. it nationalized all land in japan, to be distributed equally among cultivators, and ordered the compilation of a household registry as the basis for a new system of taxation. the true aim of the reforms was to bring about greater centralization and to enhance the power of the imperial court, which was also based on the governmental structure of china. envoys and students were dispatched to china to learn about chinese writing, politics, art, and religion. the jinshin war of , a bloody conflict between prince ama and his nephew prince tomo, became a major catalyst for further administrative reforms. these reforms culminated with the promulgation of the taih code, which consolidated existing statutes and established the structure of the central and subordinate local governments. these legal reforms created the ritsury state, a system of chinesestyle centralized government that remained in place for half a millennium.the nara period  marked the emergence of a japanese state centered on the imperial court in heijky . the period is characterized by the appearance of a nascent literary culture with the completion of the kojiki  and nihon shoki , as well as the development of buddhistinspired artwork and architecture. a smallpox epidemic in  is believed to have killed as much as onethird of japans population. in , emperor kanmu moved the capital, settling on heianky  in . this marked the beginning of the heian period , during which a distinctly indigenous japanese culture emerged. murasaki shikibus the tale of genji and the lyrics of japans national anthem kimigayo were written during this time.

japans feudal era was characterized by the emergence and dominance of a ruling class of warriors, the samurai. in , following the defeat of the taira clan by the minamoto clan in the genpei war, samurai minamoto no yoritomo established a military government at kamakura. after yoritomos death, the hj clan came to power as regents for the shgun. the zen school of buddhism was introduced from china in the kamakura period  and became popular among the samurai class. the kamakura shogunate repelled mongol invasions in  and  but was eventually overthrown by emperor godaigo. godaigo was defeated by ashikaga takauji in , beginning the muromachi period . the succeeding ashikaga shogunate failed to control the feudal warlords  and a civil war began in , opening the centurylong sengoku period .during the th century, portuguese traders and jesuit missionaries reached japan for the first time, initiating direct commercial and cultural exchange between japan and the west. oda nobunaga used european technology and firearms to conquer many other daimy; his consolidation of power began what was known as the azuchimomoyama period. after the death of nobunaga in , his successor, toyotomi hideyoshi, unified the nation in the early s and launched two unsuccessful invasions of korea in  and .tokugawa ieyasu served as regent for hideyoshis son toyotomi hideyori and used his position to gain political and military support. when open war broke out, ieyasu defeated rival clans in the battle of sekigahara in . he was appointed shgun by emperor goyzei in  and established the tokugawa shogunate at edo . the shogunate enacted measures including buke shohatto, as a code of conduct to control the autonomous daimy, and in  the isolationist sakoku  policy that spanned the two and a half centuries of tenuous political unity known as the edo period . modern japans economic growth began in this period, resulting in roads and water transportation routes, as well as financial instruments such as futures contracts, banking and insurance of the osaka rice brokers. the study of western sciences  continued through contact with the dutch enclave in nagasaki. the edo period gave rise to kokugaku , the study of japan by the japanese.

the united states navy sent commodore matthew c. perry to force the opening of japan to the outside world. arriving at uraga with four black ships in july , the perry expedition resulted in the march  convention of kanagawa. subsequent similar treaties with other western countries brought economic and political crises. the resignation of the shgun led to the boshin war and the establishment of a centralized state nominally unified under the emperor . adopting western political, judicial, and military institutions, the cabinet organized the privy council, introduced the meiji constitution , and assembled the imperial diet. during the meiji period , the empire of japan emerged as the most developed nation in asia and as an industrialized world power that pursued military conflict to expand its sphere of influence. after victories in the first sinojapanese war  and the russojapanese war , japan gained control of taiwan, korea and the southern half of sakhalin. the japanese population doubled from  million in  to  million by , with a significant shift to urbanization.the early th century saw a period of taish democracy  overshadowed by increasing expansionism and militarization. world war i allowed japan, which joined the side of the victorious allies, to capture german possessions in the pacific and in china. the s saw a political shift towards statism, a period of lawlessness following the  great tokyo earthquake, the passing of laws against political dissent, and a series of attempted coups. this process accelerated during the s, spawning several radical nationalist groups that shared a hostility to liberal democracy and a dedication to expansion in asia. in , japan invaded and occupied manchuria; following international condemnation of the occupation, it resigned from the league of nations two years later. in , japan signed the anticomintern pact with nazi germany; the  tripartite pact made it one of the axis powers.

the empire of japan invaded other parts of china in , precipitating the second sinojapanese war . in , the empire invaded french indochina, after which the united states placed an oil embargo on japan. on december , , japanese forces carried out surprise attacks on pearl harbor, as well as on british forces in malaya, singapore, and hong kong, among others, beginning world war ii in the pacific. throughout areas occupied by japan during the war, numerous abuses were committed against local inhabitants, with many forced into sexual slavery. after allied victories during the next four years, which culminated in the soviet invasion of manchuria and the atomic bombings of hiroshima and nagasaki in , japan agreed to an unconditional surrender. the war cost japan its colonies and millions of lives. the allies  repatriated millions of japanese settlers from their former colonies and military camps throughout asia, largely eliminating the japanese empire and its influence over the territories it conquered. the allies convened the international military tribunal for the far east to prosecute japanese leaders for war crimes.in , japan adopted a new constitution emphasizing liberal democratic practices. the allied occupation ended with the treaty of san francisco in , and japan was granted membership in the united nations in . a period of record growth propelled japan to become the secondlargest economy in the world; this ended in the mids after the popping of an asset price bubble, beginning the lost decade. in , japan suffered one of the largest earthquakes in its recorded history, triggering the fukushima daiichi nuclear disaster. on may , , after the historic abdication of emperor akihito, his son naruhito became emperor, beginning the reiwa era.

japan comprises , islands extending along the pacific coast of asia. it stretches over  km  northeastsouthwest from the sea of okhotsk to the east china sea. the countrys five main islands, from north to south, are hokkaido, honshu, shikoku, kyushu and okinawa. the ryukyu islands, which include okinawa, are a chain to the south of kyushu. the nanp islands are south and east of the main islands of japan. together they are often known as the japanese archipelago. as of , japans territory is ,. km . japan has the sixthlongest coastline in the world at , km . because of its farflung outlying islands, japan has the eighthlargest exclusive economic zone in the world, covering ,, km .the japanese archipelago is  forests and  agricultural. the primarily rugged and mountainous terrain is restricted for habitation. thus the habitable zones, mainly in the coastal areas, have very high population densities japan is the th most densely populated country. honshu has the highest population density at  persons/km  as of , while hokkaido has the lowest density of . persons/km as of . as of , approximately . of japans total area is reclaimed land . lake biwa is an ancient lake and the countrys largest freshwater lake.japan is substantially prone to earthquakes, tsunami and volcanic eruptions because of its location along the pacific ring of fire. it has the th highest natural disaster risk as measured in the  world risk index. japan has  active volcanoes. destructive earthquakes, often resulting in tsunami, occur several times each century; the  tokyo earthquake killed over , people. more recent major quakes are the  great hanshin earthquake and the  thoku earthquake, which triggered a large tsunami.

the climate of japan is predominantly temperate but varies greatly from north to south. the northernmost region, hokkaido, has a humid continental climate with long, cold winters and very warm to cool summers. precipitation is not heavy, but the islands usually develop deep snowbanks in the winter.in the sea of japan region on honshus west coast, northwest winter winds bring heavy snowfall during winter. in the summer, the region sometimes experiences extremely hot temperatures because of the foehn. the central highland has a typical inland humid continental climate, with large temperature differences between summer and winter. the mountains of the chgoku and shikoku regions shelter the seto inland sea from seasonal winds, bringing mild weather yearround.the pacific coast features a humid subtropical climate that experiences milder winters with occasional snowfall and hot, humid summers because of the southeast seasonal wind. the ryukyu and nanp islands have a subtropical climate, with warm winters and hot summers. precipitation is very heavy, especially during the rainy season. the main rainy season begins in early may in okinawa, and the rain front gradually moves north. in late summer and early autumn, typhoons often bring heavy rain. according to the environment ministry, heavy rainfall and increasing temperatures have caused problems in the agricultural industry and elsewhere. the highest temperature ever measured in japan, . c , was recorded on july , , and repeated on august , .

japan has nine forest ecoregions which reflect the climate and geography of the islands. they range from subtropical moist broadleaf forests in the ryky and bonin islands, to temperate broadleaf and mixed forests in the mild climate regions of the main islands, to temperate coniferous forests in the cold, winter portions of the northern islands. japan has over , species of wildlife as of , including the brown bear, the japanese macaque, the japanese raccoon dog, the small japanese field mouse, and the japanese giant salamander.a large network of national parks has been established to protect important areas of flora and fauna as well as  ramsar wetland sites. four sites have been inscribed on the unesco world heritage list for their outstanding natural value.

in the period of rapid economic growth after world war ii, environmental policies were downplayed by the government and industrial corporations; as a result, environmental pollution was widespread in the s and s. responding to rising concerns, the government introduced environmental protection laws in . the oil crisis in  also encouraged the efficient use of energy because of japans lack of natural resources.japan ranks th in the  environmental performance index, which measures a nations commitment to environmental sustainability. japan is the worlds fifthlargest emitter of carbon dioxide. as the host and signatory of the  kyoto protocol, japan is under treaty obligation to reduce its carbon dioxide emissions and to take other steps to curb climate change. in  the government of japan announced a target of carbonneutrality by . environmental issues include urban air pollution , waste management, water eutrophication, nature conservation, climate change, chemical management and international cooperation for conservation.

japan is a unitary state and constitutional monarchy in which the power of the emperor is limited to a ceremonial role. executive power is instead wielded by the prime minister of japan and his cabinet, whose sovereignty is vested in the japanese people. naruhito is the emperor of japan, having succeeded his father akihito upon his accession to the chrysanthemum throne in .

japans legislative organ is the national diet, a bicameral parliament. it consists of a lower house of representatives with  seats, elected by popular vote every four years or when dissolved, and an upper house of councillors with  seats, whose popularlyelected members serve sixyear terms. there is universal suffrage for adults over  years of age, with a secret ballot for all elected offices. the prime minister as the head of government has the power to appoint and dismiss ministers of state, and is appointed by the emperor after being designated from among the members of the diet. fumio kishida is japans prime minister; he took office after winning the  liberal democratic party leadership election. the rightwing big tent liberal democratic party has been the dominant party in the country since the s, often called the  system.historically influenced by chinese law, the japanese legal system developed independently during the edo period through texts such as kujikata osadamegaki. since the late th century, the judicial system has been largely based on the civil law of europe, notably germany. in , japan established a civil code based on the german brgerliches gesetzbuch, which remains in effect with postworld war ii modifications. the constitution of japan, adopted in , is the oldest unamended constitution in the world. statutory law originates in the legislature, and the constitution requires that the emperor promulgate legislation passed by the diet without giving him the power to oppose legislation. the main body of japanese statutory law is called the six codes. japans court system is divided into four basic tiers the supreme court and three levels of lower courts.according to data from the interparliamentary union, the majority of members of the japanese parliament are male and range in age from  to . in april , according to japanese public broadcaster nhk, ryosuke takashima, , is japans youngestever mayor.

japan is divided into  prefectures, each overseen by an elected governor and legislature. in the following table, the prefectures are grouped by region

a member state of the united nations since , japan is one of the g nations seeking reform of the security council. japan is a member of the g, apec, and asean plus three, and is a participant in the east asia summit. it is the worlds fifthlargest donor of official development assistance, donating us. billion in . in , japan had the fourthlargest diplomatic network in the world.japan has close economic and military relations with the united states, with which it maintains a security alliance. the united states is a major market for japanese exports and a major source of japanese imports, and is committed to defending the country, with military bases in japan. japan is also a member of the quadrilateral security dialogue , a multilateral security dialogue reformed in  aiming to limit chinese influence in the indopacific region, along with the united states, australia, and india, reflecting existing relations and patterns of cooperation.japan is engaged in several territorial disputes with its neighbors. japan contests russias control of the southern kuril islands, which were occupied by the soviet union in . south koreas control of the liancourt rocks is acknowledged but not accepted as they are claimed by japan. japan has strained relations with china and taiwan over the senkaku islands and the status of okinotorishima.

japan is the secondhighestranked asian country in the  global peace index, after singapore. it spent  of its total gdp on its defence budget in , and maintained the tenthlargest military budget in the world in . the countrys military  is restricted by article  of the japanese constitution, which renounces japans right to declare war or use military force in international disputes. the military is governed by the ministry of defense, and primarily consists of the japan ground selfdefense force, the japan maritime selfdefense force, and the japan air selfdefense force. the deployment of troops to iraq and afghanistan marked the first overseas use of japans military since world war ii.the government of japan has been making changes to its security policy which include the establishment of the national security council, the adoption of the national security strategy, and the development of the national defense program guidelines. in may , prime minister shinzo abe said japan wanted to shed the passiveness it has maintained since the end of world war ii and take more responsibility for regional security. in december , prime minister fumio kishida further confirmed this trend, instructing the government to increase spending by  until . recent tensions, particularly with north korea and china, have reignited the debate over the status of the jsdf and its relation to japanese society.

domestic security in japan is provided mainly by the prefectural police departments, under the oversight of the national police agency. as the central coordinating body for the prefectural police departments, the national police agency is administered by the national public safety commission. the special assault team comprises nationallevel counterterrorism tactical units that cooperate with territoriallevel antifirearms squads and counternbc terrorism squads. the japan coast guard guards territorial waters surrounding japan and uses surveillance and control countermeasures against smuggling, marine environmental crime, poaching, piracy, spy ships, unauthorized foreign fishing vessels, and illegal immigration.the firearm and sword possession control law strictly regulates the civilian ownership of guns, swords, and other weaponry. according to the united nations office on drugs and crime, among the member states of the un that report statistics as of , the incidence rates of violent crimes such as murder, abduction, sexual violence, and robbery are very low in japan.

japan has faced criticism for not allowing samesex marriages, despite a majority of japanese people supporting marriage equality. it is considered to be the least developed out of the g nations in terms of lgbt equality. japan does not explicitly legally ban racial or religious discrimination.

japan has the worlds fourthlargest economy by nominal gdp, after that of the united states, china and germany; and the fourthlargest economy by ppp. as of , japans labor force is the worlds eighthlargest, consisting of over . million workers. as of , japan has a low unemployment rate of around .. its poverty rate is the second highest among the g nations, and exceeds . of the population. japan has the highest ratio of public debt to gdp among advanced economies, with national debt estimated at  relative to gdp as of . the japanese yen is the worlds thirdlargest reserve currency after the us dollar and the euro.japan was the worlds fifthlargest exporter and fourthlargest importer in . its exports amounted to . of its total gdp in . as of , japans main export markets were china  and the united states . its main exports are motor vehicles, iron and steel products, semiconductors, and auto parts. japans main import markets as of  were china , the united states , and australia . japans main imports are machinery and equipment, fossil fuels, foodstuffs, chemicals, and raw materials for its industries.the japanese variant of capitalism has many distinct features keiretsu enterprises are influential, and lifetime employment and senioritybased career advancement are common in the japanese work environment. japan has a large cooperative sector, with three of the worlds ten largest cooperatives, including the largest consumer cooperative and the largest agricultural cooperative as of . it ranks highly for competitiveness and economic freedom. japan ranked sixth in the global competitiveness report in . it attracted . million international tourists in , and was ranked eleventh in the world in  for inbound tourism. the  travel and tourism competitiveness report ranked japan first in the world out of  countries. its international tourism receipts in  amounted to . billion.

the japanese agricultural sector accounts for about . of the total countrys gdp as of . only . of japans land is suitable for cultivation. because of this lack of arable land, a system of terraces is used to farm in small areas. this results in one of the worlds highest levels of crop yields per unit area, with an agricultural selfsufficiency rate of about  as of . japans small agricultural sector is highly subsidized and protected. there has been a growing concern about farming as farmers are aging with a difficult time finding successors.japan ranked seventh in the world in tonnage of fish caught and captured ,, metric tons of fish in , down from an annual average of ,, tons over the previous decade. japan maintains one of the worlds largest fishing fleets and accounts for nearly  of the global catch, prompting critiques that japans fishing is leading to depletion in fish stocks such as tuna. japan has sparked controversy by supporting commercial whaling.

japan has a large industrial capacity and is home to some of the largest and most technologically advanced producers of motor vehicles, machine tools, steel and nonferrous metals, ships, chemical substances, textiles, and processed foods. japans industrial sector makes up approximately . of its gdp. the countrys manufacturing output is the third highest in the world as of .japan is the thirdlargest automobile producer in the world as of  and is home to toyota, the worlds largest automobile company by vehicle production. quantitatively, japan was the worlds largest exporter of cars in , though it was overtaken by china in early . the japanese shipbuilding industry faces increasing competition from its east asian neighbors, south korea and china; as a  government initiative identified this sector as a target for increasing exports.japans service sector accounts for about . of its total economic output as of . banking, retail, transportation, and telecommunications are all major industries, with companies such as toyota, mitsubishi ufj, ntt, on, softbank, hitachi, and itochu listed as among the largest in the world.

japan is a leading nation in scientific research, particularly in the natural sciences and engineering. the country ranked th in the global innovation index in . relative to gross domestic product, japans research and development budget is the second highest in the world, with , researchers sharing a trillionyen research and development budget as of . the country has produced twentytwo nobel laureates in either physics, chemistry or medicine, and three fields medalists.japan leads the world in robotics production and use, supplying  of the worlds  total; down from  in . japan has the second highest number of researchers in science and technology per capita in the world with  per  employees.once considered the strongest in the world, the japanese consumer electronics industry is in a state of decline as regional competition arises in neighboring east asian countries such as south korea and china. however, japans video game sector remains a major industry. in , japans consumer video game market grossed . billion, with . billion coming from mobile gaming. by , japan had become the worlds fourthlargest pc game market, behind only china, the united states, and south korea.the japan aerospace exploration agency is japans national space agency; it conducts space, planetary, and aviation research, and leads development of rockets and satellites. it is a participant in the international space station the japanese experiment module  was added to the station during space shuttle assembly flights in . the space probe akatsuki was launched in  and achieved orbit around venus in . japans plans in space exploration include building a moon base and landing astronauts by . in , it launched lunar explorer selene  from tanegashima space center. the largest lunar mission since the apollo program, its purpose was to gather data on the moons origin and evolution. the explorer entered a lunar orbit on october , , and was deliberately crashed into the moon on june , .

japan has invested heavily in transportation infrastructure. the country has approximately ,, kilometers  of roads made up of ,, kilometers  of city, town and village roads, , kilometers  of prefectural roads, , kilometers  of general national highways and  kilometers  of national expressways as of .since privatization in , dozens of japanese railway companies compete in regional and local passenger transportation markets; major companies include seven jr enterprises, kintetsu, seibu railway and keio corporation. the highspeed shinkansen  that connect major cities are known for their safety and punctuality.there are  airports in japan as of . the largest domestic airport, haneda airport in tokyo, was asias secondbusiest airport in . the keihin and hanshin superport hubs are among the largest in the world, at . and . million teu respectively as of .

as of , . of energy in japan was produced from petroleum, . from coal, . from natural gas, . from hydropower and . from nuclear power, among other sources. nuclear power was down from . percent in . by may  all of the countrys nuclear power plants had been taken offline because of ongoing public opposition following the fukushima daiichi nuclear disaster in march , though government officials continued to try to sway public opinion in favor of returning at least some to service. the sendai nuclear power plant restarted in , and since then several other nuclear power plants have been restarted. japan lacks significant domestic reserves and has a heavy dependence on imported energy. the country has therefore aimed to diversify its sources and maintain high levels of energy efficiency.

responsibility for the water and sanitation sector is shared between the ministry of health, labour and welfare, in charge of water supply for domestic use; the ministry of land, infrastructure, transport, and tourism, in charge of water resources development as well as sanitation; the ministry of the environment, in charge of ambient water quality and environmental preservation; and the ministry of internal affairs and communications, in charge of performance benchmarking of utilities. access to an improved water source is universal in japan. about  of the population receives piped water supply from public utilities.

japan has a population of almost  million, of which nearly  million are japanese nationals . a small population of foreign residents makes up the remainder. 

japan is the worlds fastest aging country and has the highest proportion of elderly citizens of any country, comprising onethird of its total population; this is the result of a postworld war ii baby boom, which was followed by an increase in life expectancy and a decrease in birth rates. japan has a total fertility rate of ., which is below the replacement rate of ., and is among the worlds lowest; it has a median age of ., the highest in the world. as of , over . percent of the population is over , or more than one in four out of the japanese population. as a growing number of younger japanese are not marrying or remaining childless, japans population is expected to drop to around  million by .the changes in demographic structure have created several social issues, particularly a decline in the workforce population and an increase in the cost of social security benefits. the government of japan projects that there will be almost one elderly person for each person of working age by . immigration and birth incentives are sometimes suggested as a solution to provide younger workers to support the nations aging population. on april , , japans revised immigration law was enacted, protecting the rights of foreign workers to help reduce labor shortages in certain sectors.in ,  of the total japanese population lived in cities. the capital city, tokyo, has a population of . million . it is part of the greater tokyo area, the biggest metropolitan area in the world with ,, people . japan is an ethnically and culturally homogeneous society, with the japanese people forming . of the countrys population. minority ethnic groups in the country include the indigenous ainu and ryukyuan people. zainichi koreans, chinese, filipinos, brazilians mostly of japanese descent, and peruvians mostly of japanese descent are also among japans small minority groups. burakumin make up a social minority group.

japans constitution guarantees full religious freedom. upper estimates suggest that  percent of the japanese population subscribe to shinto as its indigenous religion. however, these estimates are based on people affiliated with a temple, rather than the number of true believers. many japanese people practice both shinto and buddhism; they can either identify with both religions or describe themselves as nonreligious or spiritual. the level of participation in religious ceremonies as a cultural tradition remains high, especially during festivals and occasions such as the first shrine visit of the new year. taoism and confucianism from china have also influenced japanese beliefs and customs.christianity was first introduced into japan by jesuit missions starting in . today,  to . of the population are christians. throughout the latest century, western customs originally related to christianity  have become popular as secular customs among many japanese.about  of those practicing islam in japan are foreignborn migrants as of . as of  there were an estimated  mosques and , muslims in japan, , of which were japanese nationals. other minority religions include hinduism, judaism, and bah faith, as well as the animist beliefs of the ainu.

the japanese language is japans de facto national language and the primary written and spoken language of most people in the country. japanese writing uses kanji  and two sets of kana , as well as the latin alphabet and arabic numerals. english has taken a major role in japan as a business and international link language. as a result, the prevalence of english in the educational system has increased, with english classes becoming mandatory at all levels of the japanese school system by . japanese sign language is the primary sign language used in japan and has gained some official recognition, but its usage has been historically hindered by discriminatory policies and a lack of educational support.besides japanese, the ryukyuan languages , part of the japonic language family, are spoken in the ryukyu islands chain. few children learn these languages, but local governments have sought to increase awareness of the traditional languages. the ainu language, which is a language isolate, is moribund, with only a few native speakers remaining as of . additionally, a number of other languages are taught and used by ethnic minorities, immigrant communities, and a growing number of foreignlanguage students, such as korean , chinese and portuguese.

since the  fundamental law of education, compulsory education in japan comprises elementary and junior high school, which together last for nine years. almost all children continue their education at a threeyear senior high school. the two topranking universities in japan are the university of tokyo and kyoto university. starting in april , various schools began the academic year with elementary school and junior high school integrated into one nineyear compulsory schooling program; mext plans for this approach to be adopted nationwide.the programme for international student assessment  coordinated by the oecd ranks the knowledge and skills of japanese yearolds as the third best in the world. japan is one of the topperforming oecd countries in reading literacy, math and sciences with the average student scoring  and has one of the worlds highesteducated labor forces among oecd countries. it spent roughly . of its total gdp on education as of , below the oecd average of .. in , the country ranked third for the percentage of  to yearolds that have attained tertiary education with .. approximately  of japanese aged  to  have some form of tertiary education qualification, and bachelors degrees are held by . of japanese aged  to , the second most in the oecd after south korea. in , the share of women among tertiary programmes graduates was ,.

health care in japan is provided by national and local governments. payment for personal medical services is offered through a universal health insurance system that provides relative equality of access, with fees set by a government committee. people without insurance through employers can participate in a national health insurance program administered by local governments. since , all elderly persons have been covered by governmentsponsored insurance.japan spent . of its total gdp on healthcare in . in , the overall life expectancy in japan at birth was . years , the highest in the world; while it had a very low infant mortality rate . since , the principal cause of death in japan is cancer, which accounted for  of the total deaths in followed by cardiovascular diseases, which led to  of the deaths. japan has one of the worlds highest suicide rates, which is considered a major social issue. another significant public health issue is smoking among japanese men. however, japan has the lowest rate of heart disease in the oecd, and the lowest level of dementia among developed countries.

contemporary japanese culture combines influences from asia, europe, and north america. traditional japanese arts include crafts such as ceramics, textiles, lacquerware, swords and dolls; performances of bunraku, kabuki, noh, dance, and rakugo; and other practices, the tea ceremony, ikebana, martial arts, calligraphy, origami, onsen, geisha and games. japan has a developed system for the protection and promotion of both tangible and intangible cultural properties and national treasures. twentytwo sites have been inscribed on the unesco world heritage list, eighteen of which are of cultural significance. japan is considered a cultural superpower.

the history of japanese painting exhibits synthesis and competition between native japanese esthetics and imported ideas. the interaction between japanese and european art has been significant for example ukiyoe prints, which began to be exported in the th century in the movement known as japonism, had a significant influence on the development of modern art in the west, most notably on postimpressionism.japanese architecture is a combination of local and other influences. it has traditionally been typified by wooden or mud plaster structures, elevated slightly off the ground, with tiled or thatched roofs. the shrines of ise have been celebrated as the prototype of japanese architecture. traditional housing and many temple buildings see the use of tatami mats and sliding doors that break down the distinction between rooms and indoor and outdoor space. since the th century, japan has incorporated much of western modern architecture into construction and design. it was not until after world war ii that japanese architects made an impression on the international scene, firstly with the work of architects like kenz tange and then with movements like metabolism.

the earliest works of japanese literature include the kojiki and nihon shoki chronicles and the manysh poetry anthology, all from the th century and written in chinese characters. in the early heian period, the system of phonograms known as kana  was developed. the tale of the bamboo cutter is considered the oldest extant japanese narrative. an account of court life is given in the pillow book by sei shnagon, while the tale of genji by murasaki shikibu is often described as the worlds first novel.during the edo period, the chnin  overtook the samurai aristocracy as producers and consumers of literature. the popularity of the works of saikaku, for example, reveals this change in readership and authorship, while bash revivified the poetic tradition of the kokinsh with his haikai  and wrote the poetic travelogue oku no hosomichi. the meiji era saw the decline of traditional literary forms as japanese literature integrated western influences. natsume sseki and mori gai were significant novelists in the early th century, followed by rynosuke akutagawa, junichir tanizaki, kaf nagai and, more recently, haruki murakami and kenji nakagami. japan has two nobel prizewinning authors  yasunari kawabata  and kenzabur e .japanese philosophy has historically been a fusion of both foreign, particularly chinese and western, and uniquely japanese elements. in its literary forms, japanese philosophy began about fourteen centuries ago. confucian ideals remain evident in the japanese concept of society and the self, and in the organization of the government and the structure of society. buddhism has profoundly impacted japanese psychology, metaphysics, and esthetics.

japanese music is eclectic and diverse. many instruments, such as the koto, were introduced in the th and th centuries. the popular folk music, with the guitarlike shamisen, dates from the th century. western classical music, introduced in the late th century, forms an integral part of japanese culture. kumidaiko  was developed in postwar japan and became very popular in north america. popular music in postwar japan has been heavily influenced by american and european trends, which has led to the evolution of jpop. karaoke is a significant cultural activity.the four traditional theaters from japan are noh, kygen, kabuki, and bunraku. noh is one of the oldest continuous theater traditions in the world.

officially, japan has  national, governmentrecognized holidays. public holidays in japan are regulated by the public holiday law  of . beginning in , japan implemented the happy monday system, which moved a number of national holidays to monday in order to obtain a long weekend. the national holidays in japan are new years day on january , coming of age day on the second monday of january, national foundation day on february , the emperors birthday on february , vernal equinox day on march  or , shwa day on april , constitution memorial day on may , greenery day on may , childrens day on may , marine day on the third monday of july, mountain day on august , respect for the aged day on the third monday of september, autumnal equinox on september  or , health and sports day on the second monday of october, culture day on november , and labor thanksgiving day on november .

japanese cuisine offers a vast array of regional specialties that use traditional recipes and local ingredients. seafood and japanese rice or noodles are traditional staples. japanese curry, since its introduction to japan from british india, is so widely consumed that it can be termed a national dish, alongside ramen and sushi. traditional japanese sweets are known as wagashi. ingredients such as red bean paste and mochi are used. more modernday tastes include green tea ice cream.popular japanese beverages include sake, which is a brewed rice beverage that typically contains  alcohol and is made by multiple fermentation of rice. beer has been brewed in japan since the late th century. green tea is produced in japan and prepared in forms such as matcha, used in the japanese tea ceremony.

according to the  nhk survey on television viewing in japan,  percent of japanese watch television daily. japanese television dramas are viewed both within japan and internationally; other popular shows are in the genres of variety shows, comedy, and news programs. many japanese media franchises have gained considerable global popularity and are among the worlds highestgrossing media franchises. japanese newspapers are among the most circulated in the world as of .japan has one of the oldest and largest film industries globally. ishir hondas godzilla became an international icon of japan and spawned an entire subgenre of kaiju films, as well as the longestrunning film franchise in history. japanese comics, known as manga, developed in the midth century and have become popular worldwide. a large number of manga series have become some of the bestselling comics series of all time, rivalling the american comics industry. japanese animated films and television series, known as anime, were largely influenced by japanese manga and have become highly popular internationally.

traditionally, sumo is considered japans national sport. japanese martial arts such as judo and kendo are taught as part of the compulsory junior high school curriculum. baseball is the most popular sport in the country. japans top professional league, nippon professional baseball , was established in . since the establishment of the japan professional football league  in , association football gained a wide following. the country cohosted the  fifa world cup with south korea. japan has one of the most successful football teams in asia, winning the asian cup four times, and the fifa womens world cup in . golf is also popular in japan.in motorsport, japanese automotive manufacturers have been successful in multiple different categories, with titles and victories in series such as formula one, motogp, and the world rally championship. drivers from japan have victories at the indianapolis  and the  hours of le mans as well as podium finishes in formula one, in addition to success in domestic championships. super gt is the most popular national racing series in japan, while super formula is the toplevel domestic openwheel series. the country hosts major races such as the japanese grand prix.japan hosted the summer olympics in tokyo in  and the winter olympics in sapporo in  and nagano in . the country hosted the official  basketball world championship and will cohost the  basketball world championship. tokyo hosted the  summer olympics in , making tokyo the first asian city to host the olympics twice. the country gained the hosting rights for the official womens volleyball world championship on five occasions, more than any other nation. japan is the most successful asian rugby union country and hosted the  irb rugby world cup.

michael jeffrey jordan , also known by his initials mj, is an american businessman and former professional basketball player. his profile on the official national basketball association  website states that by acclamation, michael jordan is the greatest basketball player of all time. he played fifteen seasons in the nba, winning six nba championships with the chicago bulls. he was integral in popularizing the sport of basketball and the nba around the world in the s and s, becoming a global cultural icon.jordan played college basketball for three seasons under coach dean smith with the north carolina tar heels. as a freshman, he was a member of the tar heels national championship team in . jordan joined the bulls in  as the third overall draft pick and quickly emerged as a league star, entertaining crowds with his prolific scoring while gaining a reputation as one of the games best defensive players. his leaping ability, demonstrated by performing slam dunks from the freethrow line in slam dunk contests, earned him the nicknames air jordan and his airness. jordan won his first nba title with the bulls in  and followed that achievement with titles in  and , securing a threepeat. jordan abruptly retired from basketball before the  nba season to play minor league baseball but returned to the bulls in march  and led them to three more championships in , , and , as well as a thenrecord  regular season wins in the  nba season. he retired for the second time in january  but returned for two more nba seasons from  to  as a member of the washington wizards. during his professional career, he was also selected to play for the united states national team, winning four gold medalsat the  pan american games,  summer olympics,  tournament of the americas and  summer olympicswhile also being undefeated.jordans individual accolades and accomplishments include six nba finals most valuable player  awards, ten nba scoring titles , five nba mvp awards, ten allnba first team designations, nine alldefensive first team honors, fourteen nba allstar game selections, three nba allstar game mvp awards, three nba steals titles, and the  nba defensive player of the year award. he holds the nba records for career regular season scoring average  and career playoff scoring average . in , he was named the th centurys greatest north american athlete by espn and was second to babe ruth on the associated press list of athletes of the century. jordan was twice inducted into the naismith memorial basketball hall of fame, once in  for his individual career, and again in  as part of the  united states mens olympic basketball team . he became a member of the united states olympic hall of fame in , a member of the north carolina sports hall of fame in , and an individual member of the fiba hall of fame in  and a dream team member in . in , he was named to the nba th anniversary team.one of the most effectively marketed athletes of his generation, jordan made many product endorsements. he fueled the success of nikes air jordan sneakers, which were introduced in  and remain popular. he starred as himself in the liveaction/animation hybrid film space jam  and was the central focus of the emmywinning documentary series the last dance . he became partowner and head of basketball operations for the charlotte hornets  in  and bought a controlling interest in , before selling his majority stake in . he is also the owner of xi racing in the nascar cup series. in , he became the first billionaire player in nba history. that year, president barack obama awarded him the presidential medal of freedom. as of , his net worth is estimated at  billion by forbes.

michael jeffrey jordan was born at cumberland hospital in the fort greene neighborhood of new york citys brooklyn borough on february , , to bank employee deloris  and equipment supervisor james r. jordan sr. he has two older brothers, james r. jordan jr. and fellow basketball player larry jordan, as well as an older sister named deloris and a younger sister named roslyn. james jr. became command sergeant major of the th signal brigade of the u.s. armys xviii airborne corps and retired in . in , jordan moved with his family to wilmington, north carolina. he attended emsley a. laney high school in wilmington, where he highlighted his athletic career by playing basketball, baseball, and football. he tried out for the basketball varsity team during his sophomore year, but at a height of  feet  inches , he was deemed too short to play at that level. his taller friend harvest leroy smith was the only sophomore to make the team.motivated to prove his worth, jordan became the star of laneys junior varsity team and tallied some point games. the following summer, he grew four inches  and trained rigorously. upon earning a spot on the varsity roster, he averaged more than  points per game  over his final two seasons of high school play. as a senior, he was selected to play in the  mcdonalds allamerican game and scored  points, after averaging  ppg,  rebounds , and six assists per game  for the season. he was recruited by numerous college basketball programs, including duke, north carolina, south carolina, syracuse, and virginia. in , he accepted a basketball scholarship to the university of north carolina at chapel hill, where he majored in cultural geography.

as a freshman in coach dean smiths teamoriented system, jordan was named acc freshman of the year after he averaged . ppg on . shooting . he made the gamewinning jump shot in the  ncaa championship game against georgetown, which was led by future nba rival patrick ewing. jordan later described this shot as the major turning point in his basketball career. during his three seasons with the tar heels, he averaged . ppg on . shooting and added . rpg and . apg.jordan was selected by consensus to the ncaa allamerican first team in both his sophomore  and junior  seasons. after winning the naismith and the wooden college player of the year awards in , jordan left north carolina one year before his scheduled graduation to enter the  nba draft. jordan returned to north carolina to complete his degree in , when he graduated with a bachelor of arts degree in geography. in , jordan was named to the acc th anniversary mens basketball team honoring the  greatest players in acc history.

the chicago bulls selected jordan with the third overall pick of the  nba draft after hakeem olajuwon  and sam bowie . one of the primary reasons why jordan was not drafted sooner was because the first two teams were in need of a center. trail blazers general manager stu inman contended that it was not a matter of drafting a center but more a matter of taking bowie over jordan, in part because portland already had clyde drexler, who was a guard with similar skills to jordan. citing bowies injuryladen college career, espn named the blazers choice of bowie as the worst draft pick in north american professional sports history.jordan made his nba debut at chicago stadium on october , , and scored  points. in , a ticket stub from the game sold at auction for ,, setting a record for a collectible ticket stub. during his rookie  season with the bulls, jordan averaged . ppg on . shooting, and helped make a team that had won  of games in the previous three seasons playoff contenders. he quickly became a fan favorite even in opposing arenas. roy s. johnson of the new york times described him as the phenomenal rookie of the bulls in november, and jordan appeared on the cover of sports illustrated with the heading a star is born in december. the fans also voted in jordan as an allstar starter during his rookie season. controversy arose before the  nba allstar game when word surfaced that several veteran players, led by isiah thomas, were upset by the amount of attention jordan was receiving. this led to a socalled freezeout on jordan, where players refused to pass the ball to him. the controversy left jordan relatively unaffected when he returned to regular season play, and he would go on to be voted the nba rookie of the year. the bulls finished the season , and lost to the milwaukee bucks in four games in the first round of the playoffs.an oftencited moment was on august , , when jordan shook the arena during a nike exhibition game in trieste, italy, by shattering the glass of the backboard with a dunk. the moment was filmed and is often referred to as an important milestone in jordans rise. the shoes jordan wore during the game were auctioned in august  for ,, a record for a pair of sneakers. jordans  season was cut short when he broke his foot in the third game of the year, causing him to miss  games. the bulls made the playoffs despite jordans injury and a  record, at the time the fifthworst record of any team to qualify for the playoffs in nba history. jordan recovered in time to participate in the postseason and performed well upon his return. on april  at the boston garden, in game  of the first round, a  double overtime loss to the eventual nba champion boston celtics, jordan scored a playoff careerhigh  points, breaking elgin baylors singlegame playoff scoring record. a celtics team that is often considered one of the greatest in nba history swept the series in three games.jordan completely recovered in time for the  season, and had one of the most prolific scoring seasons in nba history; he became the only player other than wilt chamberlain to score , points in a season, averaging a leaguehigh . ppg on . shooting. in addition, jordan demonstrated his defensive prowess, as he became the first player in nba history to record  steals and  blocked shots in a season. despite jordans success, magic johnson won the nba most valuable player award. the bulls reached  wins, and advanced to the playoffs for the third consecutive year but were again swept by the celtics.

jordan again led the league in scoring during the  season, averaging . ppg on . shooting, and he won his first league mvp award. he was also named the nba defensive player of the year, as he averaged . blocks per game , a leaguehigh . steals per game , and led the bulls defense to the fewest points per game allowed in the league. the bulls finished , and made it out of the first round of the playoffs for the first time in jordans career, as they defeated the cleveland cavaliers in five games. in the eastern conference semifinals, the bulls lost in five games to the more experienced detroit pistons, who were led by isiah thomas and a group of physical players known as the bad boys.in the  season, jordan again led the league in scoring, averaging . ppg on . shooting from the field, along with  rpg and  apg. during the season, sam vincent, chicagos point guard, was having trouble running the offense, and jordan expressed his frustration with head coach doug collins, who then put jordan at point guard. in his time as a point guard, jordan had  tripledoubles in  games, with averages of . ppg, . rpg, . apg, . spg, and . bpg on  shooting.the bulls finished with a  record, and advanced to the eastern conference finals, defeating the cavaliers and new york knicks along the way. the cavaliers series included a career highlight for jordan when he hit the shot over craig ehlo at the buzzer in the fifth and final game of the series. in the eastern conference finals, the pistons again defeated the bulls, this time in six games, by utilizing their jordan rules method of guarding jordan, which consisted of double and triple teaming him every time he touched the ball.the bulls entered the  season as a team on the rise, with their core group of jordan and young improving players like scottie pippen and horace grant, and under the guidance of new coach phil jackson. on march , , jordan scored a careerhigh  points in a  road win over the cavaliers. he averaged a leagueleading . ppg on . shooting, to go with . rpg and . apg, in leading the bulls to a  record. they again advanced to the eastern conference finals after beating the bucks and philadelphia ers; despite pushing the series to seven games, the bulls lost to the pistons for the third consecutive season.

in the  season, jordan won his second mvp award after averaging . ppg on . shooting, . rpg, and . apg for the regular season. the bulls finished in first place in their division for the first time in sixteen years and set a franchise record with  wins in the regular season. with scottie pippen developing into an allstar, the bulls had elevated their play. the bulls defeated the new york knicks and the philadelphia ers in the opening two rounds of the playoffs. they advanced to the eastern conference finals where their rival, the detroit pistons, awaited them; this time, the bulls beat the pistons in a fourgame sweep.the bulls advanced to the finals for the first time in franchise history to face the los angeles lakers, who had magic johnson and james worthy, two formidable opponents. the bulls won the series four games to one, and compiled a  playoff record along the way. perhaps the bestknown moment of the series came in game  when, attempting a dunk, jordan avoided a potential sam perkins block by switching the ball from his right hand to his left in midair to lay the shot into the basket. in his first finals appearance, jordan had . ppg on  shooting from the field, . apg, . rpg, . spg, and . bpg. jordan won his first nba finals mvp award, and he cried while holding the finals trophy.jordan and the bulls continued their dominance in the  season, establishing a  record, topping their franchise record from the  campaign. jordan won his second consecutive mvp award with averages of . ppg, . rbg, and . apg on  shooting. after winning a physical sevengame series over the new york knicks in the second round of the playoffs and finishing off the cleveland cavaliers in the conference finals in six games, the bulls met clyde drexler and the portland trail blazers in the finals. the media, hoping to recreate a magicbird rivalry, highlighted the similarities between air jordan and clyde the glide during the prefinals hype.in the first game, jordan scored a finalsrecord  points in the first half, including a recordsetting six threepoint field goals. after the sixth threepointer, he jogged down the court shrugging as he looked courtside. marv albert, who broadcast the game, later stated that it was as if jordan was saying i cant believe im doing this. the bulls went on to win game  and defeat the blazers in six games. jordan was named finals mvp for the second year in a row, and finished the series averaging . ppg, . rpg, and . apg, while shooting . from the floor.in the  season, despite a . ppg, . rpg, and . apg campaign, including a secondplace finish in defensive player of the year voting, jordans streak of consecutive mvp seasons ended, as he lost the award to his friend charles barkley, which upset him. coincidentally, jordan and the bulls met barkley and his phoenix suns in the  nba finals. the bulls won their third nba championship on a gamewinning shot by john paxson and a lastsecond block by horace grant, but jordan was once again chicagos leader. he averaged a finalsrecord . ppg during the sixgame series, and became the first player in nba history to win three straight finals mvp awards. he scored more than  points in every game of the series, including  or more points in four consecutive games. with his third finals triumph, jordan capped off a sevenyear run where he attained seven scoring titles and three championships, but there were signs that jordan was tiring of his massive celebrity and all of the nonbasketball hassles in his life.

during the bulls  nba playoffs, jordan was seen gambling in atlantic city, new jersey, the night before game  of the eastern conference finals against the new york knicks. the previous year, he admitted that he had to cover , in gambling losses, and author richard esquinas wrote a book in  claiming he had won . million from jordan on the golf course. david stern, the commissioner of the nba, denied in  and  that jordans  retirement was a secret suspension by the league for gambling, but the rumor spread widely.

in , jordan discussed his gambling with ed bradley of  minutes and admitted that he made reckless decisions. jordan stated yeah, ive gotten myself into situations where i would not walk away and ive pushed the envelope. is that compulsive yeah, it depends on how you look at it. if youre willing to jeopardize your livelihood and your family, then yeah. when bradley asked him if his gambling ever got to the level where it jeopardized his livelihood or family, jordan replied no. in , ron shelton, director of jordan rides the bus, said that he began working on the documentary believing that the nba had suspended him, but that research convinced him it was nonsense.

on october , , jordan announced his retirement, saying that he lost his desire to play basketball. jordan later said that the murder of his father three months earlier helped shape his decision. james r. jordan sr. was murdered on july , , at a highway rest area in lumberton, north carolina, by two teenagers, daniel green and larry martin demery, who carjacked his lexus. his body, dumped in a south carolina swamp, was not discovered until august . green and demery were found after they made calls on james jordans cell phone, convicted, and sentenced to life in prison.jordan was close to his father; as a child, he imitated the way his father stuck out his tongue while absorbed in work. he later adopted it as his own signature, often displaying it as he drove to the basket. in , he founded a chicagoarea boys  girls club and dedicated it to his father. in his  autobiography for the love of the game, jordan wrote that he was preparing for retirement as early as the summer of . the added exhaustion due to the dream team run in the  summer olympics solidified jordans feelings about the game and his evergrowing celebrity status. jordans announcement sent shock waves throughout the nba and appeared on the front pages of newspapers around the world.jordan further surprised the sports world by signing a minor league baseball contract with the chicago white sox on february , . he reported to spring training in sarasota, florida, and was assigned to the teams minor league system on march , . jordan said that this decision was made to pursue the dream of his late father, who always envisioned his son as a major league baseball player. the white sox were owned by bulls owner jerry reinsdorf, who continued to honor jordans basketball contract during the years he played baseball.in , jordan played for the birmingham barons, a doublea minor league affiliate of the chicago white sox, batting . with three home runs,  runs batted in,  stolen bases,  strikeouts,  bases on balls, and  errors. his strikeout total led the team and his games played tied for the team lead. his  stolen bases were second on the team only to doug brady. he also appeared for the scottsdale scorpions in the  arizona fall league, batting . against the top prospects in baseball. on november , , his no.  was retired by the bulls in a ceremony that included the erection of a permanent sculpture known as the spirit outside the new united center.

the bulls went  in  without jordan in the lineup and lost to the new york knicks in the second round of the playoffs. the  bulls were a shell of the championship team of just two years earlier. struggling at midseason to ensure a spot in the playoffs, chicago was  at one point in midmarch; the team received help when jordan decided to return to the bulls.in march , jordan decided to quit baseball because he feared he might become a replacement player during the major league baseball strike. on march , , jordan announced his return to the nba in a twoword press release im back. the next day, jordan took to the court with the bulls to face the indiana pacers in indianapolis, scoring  points. the game had the highest nielsen rating of any regular season nba game since . although he could have worn his original number even though the bulls retired it, jordan wore no. , his baseball number.despite his eighteenmonth hiatus from the nba, jordan played well, making a gamewinning jump shot against atlanta in his fourth game back. he scored  points in his next game, against the new york knicks at madison square garden on march , . boosted by jordans comeback, the bulls went  to make the playoffs and advanced to the eastern conference semifinals against the orlando magic. at the end of game , orlandos nick anderson stripped jordan from behind, leading to the gamewinning basket for the magic; he later commented that jordan didnt look like the old michael jordan, and said that no.  doesnt explode like no.  used to.jordan responded by scoring  points in the next game, which chicago won. before the game, jordan decided that he would immediately resume wearing his former no. . the bulls were fined , for failing to report the impromptu number change to the nba. jordan was fined an additional , for opting to wear white sneakers when the rest of the bulls wore black. he averaged  ppg in the playoffs, but orlando won the series in six games.

jordan was freshly motivated by the playoff defeat, and he trained aggressively for the  season. the bulls were strengthened by the addition of rebound specialist dennis rodman, and the team dominated the league, starting the season at . the bulls eventually finished with the best regular season record in nba history, , a mark broken two decades later by the  golden state warriors. jordan led the league in scoring with . ppg, and he won the leagues regular season and allstar game mvp awards.in the playoffs, the bulls lost only three games in four series , as they defeated the seattle supersonics  in the nba finals to win their fourth championship. jordan was named finals mvp for a record fourth time, surpassing magic johnsons three finals mvp awards; he also achieved only the second sweep of the mvp awards in the allstar game, regular season, and nba finals after willis reed in the  season. upon winning the championship, his first since his fathers murder, jordan reacted emotionally, clutching the game ball and crying on the locker room floor.in the  season, the bulls stood at a  record but ended the season by losing their final two games to finish the year , missing out on a second consecutive win season. the bulls again advanced to the finals, where they faced the utah jazz. that team included karl malone, who had beaten jordan for the nba mvp award in a tight race . the series against the jazz featured two of the more memorable clutch moments of jordans career. he won game  for the bulls with a buzzerbeating jump shot. in game , with the series tied at , jordan played despite being feverish and dehydrated from a stomach virus. in what is known as the flu game, jordan scored  points, including the gamedeciding pointer with  seconds remaining. the bulls won  and went on to win the series in six games. for the fifth time in as many finals appearances, jordan received the finals mvp award. during the  nba allstar game, jordan posted the first tripledouble in allstar game history in a victorious effort, but the mvp award went to glen rice.

jordan and the bulls compiled a  record in the  season. jordan led the league with . ppg, securing his fifth regular season mvp award, plus honors for allnba first team, first defensive team, and the allstar game mvp. the bulls won the eastern conference championship for a third straight season, including surviving a sevengame series with the indiana pacers in the eastern conference finals; it was the first time jordan had played in a game  since the  eastern conference semifinals with the new york knicks. after winning, they moved on for a rematch with the jazz in the finals.the bulls returned to the delta center for game  on june , , leading the series . jordan executed a series of plays, considered to be one of the greatest clutch performances in nba finals history. with . seconds remaining and the bulls trailing , phil jackson called a timeout. when play resumed, jordan received the inbound pass, drove to the basket, and sank a shot over several jazz defenders, cutting utahs lead to . the jazz brought the ball upcourt and passed the ball to malone, who was set up in the low post and was being guarded by rodman. malone jostled with rodman and caught the pass, but jordan cut behind him and stole the ball out of his hands.jordan then dribbled down the court and paused, eyeing his defender, jazz guard bryon russell. with  seconds remaining, jordan started to dribble right, then crossed over to his left, possibly pushing off russell, although the officials did not call a foul. with . seconds left, jordan made the climactic shot of his bulls career, a topkey jumper over a stumbling russell to give chicago an  lead. afterwards, the jazz john stockton narrowly missed a gamewinning threepointer, and the buzzer sounded as jordan and the bulls won their sixth nba championship, achieving a second threepeat in the decade. once again, jordan was voted finals mvp for a record sixth time, having led all scorers by averaging . ppg, including  in the deciding game . the  finals holds the highest television rating of any finals series in history, and game  holds the highest television rating of any game in nba history.

with phil jacksons contract expiring, the pending departures of scottie pippen and dennis rodman looming, and being in the latter stages of an ownerinduced lockout of nba players, jordan retired for the second time on january , . on january , , jordan returned to the nba not as a player but as part owner and president of basketball operations for the washington wizards. jordans responsibilities with the wizards were comprehensive, as he controlled all aspects of the wizards basketball operations, and had the final say in all personnel matters; opinions of jordan as a basketball executive were mixed. he managed to purge the team of several highly paid, unpopular players  but used the first pick in the  nba draft to select high school student kwame brown, who did not live up to expectations and was traded away after four seasons.despite his january  claim that he was . certain he would never play another nba game, jordan expressed interest in making another comeback in the summer of , this time with his new team. inspired by the nhl comeback of his friend mario lemieux the previous winter, jordan spent much of the spring and summer of  in training, holding several invitationonly camps for nba players in chicago. jordan hired his old chicago bulls head coach, doug collins, as washingtons coach for the upcoming season, a decision that many saw as foreshadowing another jordan return.

on september , , jordan announced his return to the nba to play for the washington wizards, indicating his intention to donate his salary as a player to a relief effort for the victims of the september  attacks. in an injuryplagued  season, jordan led the team in scoring , assists , and steals , and was an mvp candidate, as he led the wizards to a winning record and playoff contention; he would eventually finish th in the mvp ballot. after suffering torn cartilage in his right knee, and subsequent knee soreness, the wizards missed the playoffs, and jordans season ended after only  games, the fewest he had played in a regular season since playing  games after returning from his first retirement during the  season. jordan started  of his  games for the season, averaging . ppg, . apg, and . rpg, and shooting . from the field in his  starts. his last seven appearances were in a reserve role, in which he averaged just over  minutes per game. the wizards finished the season with a  record, an game improvement.

playing in his th and final nba allstar game in , jordan passed kareem abduljabbar as the alltime leading scorer in allstar game history, a record since broken by kobe bryant and lebron james. that year, jordan was the only washington player to play in all  games, starting in  of them, and coming from off the bench in . he averaged . ppg, . rpg, . assists, and . spg per game. he also shot  from the field, and  from the freethrow line. even though he turned  during the season, he scored  or more points  times,  or more points nine times, and  or more points three times. on february , , jordan became the first yearold to tally  points in an nba game. during his stint with the wizards, all of jordans home games at the mci center were sold out and the wizards were the second mostwatched team in the nba, averaging , fans a game at home and , on the road. jordans final two seasons did not result in a playoff appearance for the wizards, and he was often unsatisfied with the play of those around him. at several points, he openly criticized his teammates to the media, citing their lack of focus and intensity, notably that of kwame brown, the numberone draft pick in the  nba draft.

with the recognition that  would be jordans final season, tributes were paid to him throughout the nba. in his final game at the united center in chicago, which was his old home court, jordan received a fourminute standing ovation. the miami heat retired the no.  jersey on april , , even though jordan never played for the team. at the  allstar game, jordan was offered a starting spot from tracy mcgrady and allen iverson but refused both; in the end, he accepted the spot of vince carter. jordan played in his final nba game on april , , in philadelphia. after scoring  points in the game, jordan went to the bench with  minutes and  seconds remaining in the third quarter and his team trailing the philadelphia ers . just after the start of the fourth quarter, the first union center crowd began chanting we want mike after much encouragement from coach doug collins, jordan finally rose from the bench and reentered the game, replacing larry hughes with  remaining. at , jordan was intentionally fouled by the ers eric snow, and stepped to the line to make both free throws. after the second foul shot, the ers inbounded the ball to rookie john salmons, who in turn was intentionally fouled by bobby simmons one second later, stopping time so that jordan could return to the bench. jordan received a threeminute standing ovation from his teammates, his opponents, the officials, and the crowd of , fans.

jordan made his debut for the u.s. national basketball team at the  pan american games in caracas, venezuela. he led the team in scoring with . ppg as the u.s., coached by jack hartman, won the gold medal. a year later, he won another gold medal in the  summer olympics. the  u.s. team was coached by bob knight and featured players such as patrick ewing, sam perkins, chris mullin, steve alford, and wayman tisdale. jordan led the team in scoring, averaging . ppg for the tournament.in , jordan was a member of the starstudded squad that was dubbed the dream team, which included larry bird and magic johnson. the team went on to win two gold medals the first in the  tournament of the americas, and the second in the  summer olympics. he was the only player to start all eight games in the olympics, averaged . ppg, and finished second on the team in scoring. jordan was undefeated in the four tournaments he played for the united states national team, winning all  games he took part in.

jordan was a shooting guard who could also play as a small forward, the position he would primarily play during his second return to professional basketball with the washington wizards, and as a point guard. jordan was known throughout his career as a strong clutch performer. with the bulls, he decided  games with field goals or free throws in the last  seconds, including two nba finals games and five other playoff contests. his competitiveness was visible in his prolific trash talk and wellknown work ethic. jordan often used perceived slights to fuel his performances. sportswriter wright thompson described him as a killer, in the darwinian sense of the word, immediately sensing and attacking someones weakest spot. as the bulls organization built the franchise around jordan, management had to trade away players who were not tough enough to compete with him in practice. to help improve his defense, he spent extra hours studying film of opponents. on offense, he relied more upon instinct and improvization at game time.noted as a durable player, jordan did not miss four or more games while active for a full season from  to , when he injured his right knee. of the  seasons jordan was in the nba, he played all  regular season games nine times. jordan has frequently cited david thompson, walter davis, and jerry west as influences. confirmed at the start of his career, and possibly later on, jordan had a special love of the game clause written into his contract, which was unusual at the time, and allowed him to play basketball against anyone at any time, anywhere.jordan had a versatile offensive game and was capable of aggressively driving to the basket as well as drawing fouls from his opponents at a high rate. his , free throw attempts are the thhighest total in nba history. as his career progressed, jordan also developed the ability to post up his opponents and score with his trademark fadeaway jump shot, using his leaping ability to avoid block attempts. according to hubie brown, this move alone made him nearly unstoppable. despite media criticism by some as a selfish player early in his career, jordan was willing to defer to this teammates, with a career average of . apg and a seasonhigh of . apg. for a guard, jordan was also a good rebounder, finishing with . rpg. defensively, he averaged . spg and . bpg.threepoint field goal was not jordans strength, especially in his early years. later on in jordans career, he improved his threepoint shooting, and finished his career with a respectable  success rate. his threepoint fieldgoal percentages ranged from  to  in seasons in which he attempted at least  threepointers between  and . jordans effective field goal percentage was , and he had six seasons with at least  shooting, five of which consecutively ; he also shot  and , and  and  from the threepoint range, throughout his first and second retirements, respectively, finishing his chicago bulls career with . points per game on . fg shooting and his overall career with . fg shooting.unlike nba players often compared to jordan, such as kobe bryant and lebron james, who had a similar threepoint percentage, he did not shoot as many threes as they did, as he did not need to rely on the threepointer in order to be effective on offense. threepoint shooting was only introduced in  and would not be a more fundamental aspect of the game until the first decades of the st century, with the nba having to briefly shorten the line to incentivize more shots. jordans threepoint shooting was better selected, resulting in threepoint field goals made in important games during the playoffs and the finals, such as hitting six consecutive threepoint shots in game  of the  nba finals. jordan shot , , , and  in all the seasons he shot over  threepointers, and also shot ., ., ., ., ., and . in the playoffs during his championship runs, improving his shooting even after the threepoint line reverted to the original line.in , jordan was honored with the nba defensive player of the year and the most valuable player awards, becoming the first nba player to win both awards in a career let alone season. in addition, he set both seasonal and career records for blocked shots by a guard, and combined this with his ballthieving ability to become a standout defensive player. he ranks fourth in nba history in total steals with ,, trailing john stockton, jason kidd and chris paul. jerry west often stated that he was more impressed with jordans defensive contributions than his offensive ones. doc rivers declared jordan the best superstar defender in the history of the game.jordan was known to have strong eyesight. broadcaster al michaels said that he was able to read baseball box scores on a inch  television clearly from about  feet  away. during the  nba finals, phil jackson compared jordans dominance to shaquille oneal, stating michael would get fouled on every play and still have to play through it and just clear himself for shots instead and would rise to that occasion.

jordans talent was clear from his first nba season; by november , he was being compared to julius erving. larry bird said that rookie jordan was the best player he ever saw, and that he was one of a kind, and comparable to wayne gretzky as an athlete. in his first game in madison square garden against the new york knicks, jordan received a near minutelong standing ovation. after establishing the single game playoff record of  points against the boston celtics on april , , bird described him as god disguised as michael jordan.jordan led the nba in scoring in  seasons  and tied wilt chamberlains record of seven consecutive scoring titles. he was also a fixture of the nba alldefensive first team, making the roster nine times . jordan also holds the top career regular season and playoff scoring averages of . and . ppg, respectively. by , the season of his finalswinning shot against the jazz, he was well known throughout the league as a clutch performer. in the regular season, jordan was the bulls primary threat in the final seconds of a close game and in the playoffs; he would always ask for the ball at crunch time. jordans total of , points in the playoffs is the secondhighest among nba career playoff scoring leaders. he scored , points in the regular season, placing him fifth on the nba alltime scoring list behind lebron james, kareem abduljabbar, karl malone, and bryant.with five regular season mvps , six finals mvps , and three nba allstar game mvps, jordan is the most decorated player in nba history. jordan finished among the top three in regular season mvp voting  times. he was named one of the  greatest players in nba history in , and selected to the nba th anniversary team in . jordan is one of only seven players in history to win an ncaa championship, an nba championship, and an olympic gold medal . since , the year of the abanba merger, jordan and pippen are the only two players to win six nba finals playing for one team. in the allstar game fan ballot, jordan received the most votes nine times, more than any other player.

many of jordans contemporaries have said that jordan is the greatest basketball player of all time. in , an espn survey of journalists, athletes and other sports figures ranked jordan the greatest north american athlete of the th century. jordan placed second to babe ruth in the associated press december  list of th century athletes. in addition, the associated press voted him the greatest basketball player of the th century. jordan has also appeared on the front cover of sports illustrated a record  times. in the september  issue of sport, which was the publications thanniversary issue, jordan was named the greatest athlete of the past  years.jordans athletic leaping ability, highlighted in his backtoback slam dunk contest championships in  and , is credited by many people with having influenced a generation of young players. several nba players, including james and dwyane wade, have stated that they considered jordan their role model while they were growing up. in addition, commentators have dubbed a number of nextgeneration players the next michael jordan upon their entry to the nba, including penny hardaway, grant hill, allen iverson, bryant, vince carter, james, and wade. some analysts, such as the ringers dan devine, drew parallels between jordans experiment at point guard in the  season and the modern nba; for devine, it inadvertently foreshadowed the modern games stylistic shift toward monsterusage primary playmakers, such as russell westbrook, james harden, luka doni, and james. don nelson stated i wouldve been playing him at point guard the day he showed up as a rookie.although jordan was a wellrounded player, his air jordan image is also often credited with inadvertently decreasing the jump shooting skills, defense, and fundamentals of young players, a fact jordan himself has lamented, saying i think it was the exposure of michael jordan; the marketing of michael jordan. everything was marketed towards the things that people wanted to see, which was scoring and dunking. that michael jordan still played defense and an allaround game, but it was never really publicized. during his heyday, jordan did much to increase the status of the game; television ratings increased only during his time in the league. the popularity of the nba in the u.s. declined after his last title. as late as , nba finals television ratings had not returned to the level reached during his last championshipwinning season.in august , the naismith memorial basketball hall of fame in springfield, massachusetts, opened a michael jordan exhibit that contained items from his college and nba careers as well as from the  dream team; the exhibit also has a batting baseball glove to signify jordans short career in the minor league baseball. after jordan received word of his acceptance into the hall of fame, he selected class of  member david thompson to present him. as jordan would later explain during his induction speech in september , he was not a fan of the tar heels when growing up in north carolina but greatly admired thompson, who played for the rival nc state wolfpack. in september, he was inducted into the hall with several former bulls teammates in attendance, including scottie pippen, dennis rodman, charles oakley, ron harper, steve kerr, and toni kuko. dean smith and doug collins, two of jordans former coaches, were also among those present. his emotional reaction during his speech when he began to cry was captured by associated press photographer stephan savoia and would later go viral on social media as the crying jordan internet meme. in , president barack obama honored jordan with the presidential medal of freedom. in october , jordan was named to the nba th anniversary team. in september , jordans jersey in which he played the opening game of the  nba finals was sold for . million, making it the most expensive gameworn sports memorabilia in history. in december , the nba unveiled a new mvp trophy, named in jordans honor, to be awarded beginning with the  season. the michael jordan trophy will replace the original trophy, named in honor of former nba commissioner maurice podoloff, with a new podoloff trophy set to be awarded to the team with the best overall regular season record.

nba

sixtime nba champion  , , , , , 

sixtime nba finals mvp  , , , , , 

fivetime nba mvp  , , , , 

nba defensive player of the year  

nba rookie of the year  

time nba scoring leader  , 

threetime nba steals leader  , , 

time nba allstar  , , , 

threetime nba allstar game mvp  , , 

time allnba first team  , 

onetime allnba second team  

ninetime nba alldefensive first team  , 

nba allrookie first team  

twotime nba slam dunk contest champion  , 

twotime ibm award winner  , 

named one of the  greatest players in nba history in 

selected on the nba th anniversary team in 

no.  retired by the chicago bulls

no.  retired by the miami heat

nba mvp trophy renamed in jordans honor  in usa basketball

twotime olympic gold medal winner  , 

tournament of the americas gold medal winner  

pan american games gold medal winner  

twotime usa basketball male athlete of the year  , ncaa

ncaa national championship  

acc rookie of the year  

twotime consensus ncaa allamerican first team  , 

acc mens basketball player of the year  

acc athlete of the year  

usbwa college player of the year  

naismith college player of the year  

adolph rupp trophy  

john r. wooden award  

twotime sporting news national player of  the year 

no.  retired by the north carolina tar heelshigh school

mcdonalds allamerican  

parade allamerican first team  halls of fame

twotime naismith memorial basketball hall of fame inductee

class of   individual

class of   as a member of the dream team

united states olympic hall of fame  class of  

north carolina sports hall of fame  class of 

twotime fiba hall of fame inductee

class of   individual

class of   as a member of the dream teammedia

threetime associated press athlete of the year  , , 

sports illustrated sportsperson of the year  

ranked no.  by slam magazines top  players of alltime

ranked no.  by espn sportscenturys top north american athletes of the th century

time espy award winner 

 marca leyenda winnernational

 presidential medal of freedomstate/local

statue inside the united center

section of madison street in chicago renamed michael jordan drive  

after his third retirement, jordan assumed that he would be able to return to his front office position as director of basketball operations with the wizards. his previous tenure had produced mixed results and may have also influenced the trade of richard rip hamilton for jerry stackhouse, although jordan was not technically director of basketball operations in . on may , , wizards owner abe pollin fired jordan from the role. jordan later stated that he felt betrayed, and that if he had known he would be fired upon retiring, he never would have come back to play for the wizards.over the next few years jordan played golf in celebrity charity tournaments and spent time with his family in chicago. he also promoted his jordan brand clothing line and rode motorcycles. since , jordan has owned michael jordan motorsports, a professional closedcourse motorcycle road racing team that competed with two suzukis in the premier superbike championship sanctioned by the american motorcyclist association  until the end of the  season.

on june , , jordan bought a minority stake in the charlotte bobcats , becoming the teams secondlargest shareholder behind majority owner robert l. johnson. as part of the deal, jordan took full control over the basketball side of the operation, with the title managing member of basketball operations. despite jordans previous success as an endorser, he has made an effort not to be included in charlottes marketing campaigns. a decade earlier, jordan had made a bid to become partowner of charlottes original nba team, the charlotte hornets, but talks collapsed when owner george shinn refused to give jordan complete control of basketball operations.in february , it was reported that jordan was seeking majority ownership of the bobcats. as february wore on, it became apparent that jordan and former houston rockets president george postolos were the leading contenders for ownership of the team. on february , the bobcats announced that johnson had reached an agreement with jordan and his group, mj basketball holdings, to buy the team from johnson pending nba approval. on march , the nba board of governors unanimously approved jordans purchase, making him the first former player to become the majority owner of an nba team. it also made him the leagues only africanamerican majority owner.during the  nba lockout, the new york times wrote that jordan led a group of  to  hardline owners who wanted to cap the players share of basketballrelated income at  percent and as low as . journalists observed that, during the labor dispute in , jordan had told washington wizards thenowner abe pollin if you cant make a profit, you should sell your team. jason whitlock of foxsports.com called jordan a hypocrite sellout who can easily betray the very people who made him a billionaire global icon for wanting current players to pay for his incompetence. he cited jordans executive decisions to draft disappointing players kwame brown and adam morrison.during the  nba season that was shortened to  games by the lockout, the bobcats posted a  record. the team closed out the season with a game losing streak; their . winning percentage was the worst in nba history. before the next season, jordan said im not real happy about the record book scenario last year. its very, very frustrating.during the  nba offseason, jordan sold a minority piece of the hornets to gabe plotkin and daniel sundheim, retaining the majority of the team for himself, as well as the role of chairman. in , jordan finalized the sale of his majority stake of the team to gabe plotkin and rick schnall, ending his year tenure as majority owner of the hornets, although he is keeping a minority stake. the sale was officially completed in august  for approximately  billion, more than  times the  million jordan had paid for the team.

on september , , jordan and nascar driver denny hamlin announced they would be fielding a nascar cup series team with bubba wallace driving, beginning competition in the  season. on october , the teams name was confirmed to be xi racing  and the teams entry would bear no. . after the teams inaugural season, it added a second car with no. , driven by kurt busch in  and tyler reddick in . ty gibbs, john hunter nemechek, and daniel hemric also drove for xi as substitute drivers during the  season. the team fielded a third car, no. , driven by travis pastrana in the  daytona . xi racing has won four races, two by wallace, one by busch, and one by reddick.

jordans nephew through his brother larry, justin jordan, played ncaa division i basketball for the unc greensboro spartans and is a scout for the charlotte hornets.jordan married juanita vanoy at a little white wedding chapel in las vegas on september , . they had two sons, jeffrey and marcus, and a daughter, jasmine. the jordans filed for divorce on january , , citing irreconcilable differences, but reconciled shortly thereafter. they again filed for divorce and were granted a final decree of dissolution of marriage on december , , commenting that the decision was made mutually and amicably. it is reported that juanita received a  million settlement , making it the largest celebrity divorce settlement on public record at the time.in , jordan purchased a lot in highland park, illinois, where he planned to build a ,squarefoot  mansion. it was completed in . he listed the mansion for sale in . he also owns homes in north carolina and jupiter island, florida.on july , , a judge in cook county, illinois, determined that jordan did not owe his alleged former lover karla knafel  million in a breach of contract claim. jordan had allegedly paid knafel , to keep their relationship a secret. knafel claimed jordan promised her  million for remaining silent and agreeing not to file a paternity suit after knafel learned she was pregnant in ; a dna test showed jordan was not the father of the child.jordan proposed to his longtime girlfriend, cubanamerican model yvette prieto, on christmas , and they were married on april , , at bethesdabythesea episcopal church. it was announced on november , , that the two were expecting their first child together. on february , , prieto gave birth to identical twin daughters named victoria and ysabel. in , jordan became a grandfather when his daughter jasmine gave birth to a son, whose father is professional basketball player rakeem christmas.

jordan is one of the most marketed sports figures in history. he has been a major spokesman for such brands as nike, cocacola, chevrolet, gatorade, mcdonalds, ball park franks, rayovac, wheaties, hanes, and mci. jordan has had a long relationship with gatorade, appearing in over  commercials for the company since , including the be like mike commercials in which a song was sung by children wishing to be like jordan.nike created a signature shoe for jordan, called the air jordan, in . one of jordans more popular commercials for the shoe involved spike lee playing the part of mars blackmon. in the commercials, lee, as blackmon, attempted to find the source of jordans abilities and became convinced that its gotta be the shoes. the hype and demand for the shoes even brought on a spate of shoejackings, in which people were robbed of their sneakers at gunpoint. subsequently, nike spun off the jordan line into its own division named the jordan brand. the company features a list of athletes and celebrities as endorsers. the brand has also sponsored college sports programs such as those of north carolina, ucla, california, oklahoma, florida, georgetown, and marquette.jordan also has been associated with the looney tunes cartoon characters. a nike commercial shown during s super bowl xxvi featured jordan and bugs bunny playing basketball. the super bowl commercial inspired the  live action/animated film space jam, which starred jordan and bugs in a fictional story set during the formers first retirement from basketball. they have subsequently appeared together in several commercials for mci. jordan also made an appearance in the music video for michael jacksons jam .since , jordans yearly income from endorsements is estimated to be over  million. in addition, when jordans power at the ticket gates was at its highest point, the bulls regularly sold out both their home and road games. due to this, jordan set records in player salary by signing annual contracts worth in excess of us million per season. an academic study found that jordans first nba comeback resulted in an increase in the market capitalization of his client firms of more than  billion.most of jordans endorsement deals, including his first deal with nike, were engineered by his agent, david falk. jordan has described falk as the best at what he does and that marketingwise, hes great. hes the one who came up with the concept of air jordan.

in june , jordan was ranked by forbes as the thmostpowerful celebrity in the world, with  million earned between june  and june . according to forbes, jordan brand generates  billion in sales for nike. in june , jordan was named the first nba player to become a billionaire, after he increased his stake in the charlotte hornets from  to .. on january , , jordan was honored with the charlotte business journals business person of the year for . in , he became a part owner of the miami marlins of major league baseball.forbes designated jordan as the athlete with the highest career earnings in . from his jordan brand income and endorsements, jordans  income was an estimated  million, the most of any retired athlete. as of , his net worth is estimated at  billion by forbes, making him the fifthrichest africanamerican, behind robert f. smith, david steward, oprah winfrey, and rihanna.jordan coowns an automotive group which bears his name. the company has a nissan dealership in durham, north carolina, acquired in , and formerly had a lincolnmercury dealership from  until its closure in june . the company also owned a nissan franchise in glen burnie, maryland. the restaurant industry is another business interest of jordans. restaurants he has owned include a steakhouse in new york citys grand central terminal, among others; that restaurant closed in . jordan is the majority investor in a golf course, grove xxiii, under construction in hobe sound, florida.in september , jordan became an investor and advisor for draftkings.

from  to , jordan hosted an annual golf tournament, the michael jordan celebrity invitational, that raised money for various charities. in , jordan and his wife juanita pledged  million to chicagos hales franciscan high school. the jordan brand has made donations to habitat for humanity and a louisiana branch of the boys  girls clubs of america.the makeawish foundation named jordan its chief wish ambassador in . in , he granted his th wish for the organization. as of , he has raised more than  million for the makeawish foundation. in , jordan donated  million to the organization for his th birthday.in , jordan donated a settlement of undisclosed size from a lawsuit against supermarkets that had used his name without permission to  different chicago charities. in , jordan funded two novant health michael jordan family clinics in charlotte, north carolina, by giving  million, the biggest donation he had made at the time. in , after hurricane florence damaged parts of north carolina, including his former hometown of wilmington, jordan donated  million to relief efforts. he gave  million to aid the bahamas recovery following hurricane dorian in .on june , , in the wake of the protests following the murder of george floyd, jordan and his brand announced in a joint statement that they would be donating  million over the next  years to organizations dedicated to ensuring racial equality, social justice and greater access to education. in february , jordan funded two novant health michael jordan family clinics in new hanover county, north carolina, by giving  million.

jordan played himself in the  comedy film space jam. the film received mixed reviews, but it was a box office success, making  million worldwide, and earned more than  billion through merchandise sales.in , jordan was the subject of an imax documentary about his career with the chicago bulls, especially the  nba playoffs, titled michael jordan to the max. two decades later, the same period of jordans life was covered in much greater and more personal detail by the emmy awardwinning the last dance, a part tv documentary which debuted on espn in april and may . the last dance relied heavily on about  hours of candid film of jordans and his teammates offcourt activities which an nba entertainment crew had shot over the course of the  nba season for use in a documentary. the project was delayed for many years because jordan had not yet given his permission for the footage to be used. he was interviewed at three homes associated with the production and did not want cameras in his home or on his plane, as according to director jason hehir there are certain aspects of his life that he wants to keep private.jordan granted rapper travis scott permission to film a music video for his single franchise at his home in highland park, illinois. jordan appeared in the  miniseries the captain, which follows the life and career of derek jeter.

jordan has authored several books focusing on his life, basketball career, and world view.

rare air michael on michael, with mark vancil and walter iooss .

i cant accept not trying michael jordan on the pursuit of excellence, with mark vancil and sandro miller .

for the love of the game my story, with mark vancil .

driven from within, with mark vancil .

the september  attacks, commonly known as /, were four coordinated islamist suicide terrorist attacks carried out by alqaeda against the united states in . that morning,  terrorists hijacked four commercial airliners scheduled to travel from the new england and midatlantic regions of the east coast to california. the hijackers crashed the first two planes into the twin towers of the world trade center in new york city, two of the worlds five tallest buildings at the time, and aimed the next two flights toward targets in or near washington, d.c., in an attack on the nations capital. the third team succeeded in crashing into the pentagon, the headquarters of the u.s. department of defense in arlington county, virginia, while the fourth plane crashed in rural pennsylvania following a passenger revolt. the attacks killed nearly , people and instigated the multidecade global war on terror.

the first impact was that of american airlines flight , which crashed into the north tower of the world trade center complex in lower manhattan at  a.m. sixteen minutes later, at , the world trade centers south tower was hit by united airlines flight . both story skyscrapers collapsed within an hour and fortyone minutes, bringing about the destruction of the remaining five structures in the wtc complex and damaging or destroying nearby buildings. a third flight, american airlines flight , crashed into the pentagon at  a.m., causing a partial collapse. the fourth and final flight, united airlines flight , flew in the direction of the capital. alerted to the previous attacks, the passengers retaliated in an attempt to take control of the aircraft, forcing the hijackers to crash the plane in a stonycreek township field, near indian lake and shanksville, at  a.m. investigators determined that flight s target was either the united states capitol or the white house.

within hours of the attacks, the central intelligence agency had determined that alqaeda was responsible. the united states formally responded by launching the war on terror and invading afghanistan to depose the taliban, which rejected the conditions of u.s. terms to expel alqaeda from afghanistan and extradite its leaders. the u.s.s invocation of article  of the north atlantic treatyits only usage to datecalled upon allies to fight alqaeda. as u.s. and nato invasion forces swept through afghanistan, alqaeda leader osama bin laden disappeared into the white mountains, eluding captivity by western forces. although bin laden initially denied any involvement, in  he formally claimed responsibility for the attacks. alqaedas cited motivations included u.s. support of israel, the presence of u.s. military bases in saudi arabia and sanctions against iraq. the nearly decadelong manhunt for bin laden concluded on may , , when he was killed during a u.s. military raid after being tracked down to his compound in abbottabad, pakistan. the war in afghanistan continued for another eight years until the agreement was made in february  for american and nato troops to withdraw from the country, and the last members of the u.s. armed forces left the region on august , , resulting in the return to power of the taliban.

not including the hijackers, the attacks killed , people, injured thousands more and gave rise to substantial longterm health consequences while also causing at least  billion in infrastructure and property damage. it remains the deadliest terrorist act in human history as well as the single deadliest incident for both firefighters and law enforcement personnel in the history of the united states, causing the deaths of  and  members respectively. the loss of life stemming from the impact of flight  secured its place as the most lethal plane crash in aviation history followed by the death toll incurred by flight . the destruction of the world trade center and its environs seriously harmed the u.s. economy and induced global market shocks. many other countries strengthened antiterrorism legislation and expanded their powers of law enforcement and intelligence agencies. cleanup of the world trade center site  took eight months and was completed in may , while the pentagon was repaired within a year. after delays in the design of a replacement complex, construction of the one world trade center began in november ; it opened in november . memorials to the attacks include the national september  memorial  museum in new york city, the pentagon memorial in arlington county, virginia, and the flight  national memorial at the pennsylvania crash site.

the origins of alqaeda can be traced to , when the soviet union invaded afghanistan. soon after the invasion, osama bin laden traveled to afghanistan and helped organize arab mujahideen  to resist the communist invaders  until their exit from the country in . during that time, bin laden, together with abdullah azzam, formed the maktab alkhidamat  in , an organization to support arab mujahideen who came to join the jihad in afghanistan.the u.s. central intelligence agency  funneled several billion dollars worth of weapons to the indigenous afghan mujahideen resistance, a portion of which bled to the arab volunteers. however, no direct evidence of u.s. aid to bin laden or any of his affiliates was ever uncovered.in , bin laden issued his first fatw, calling for american soldiers to leave saudi arabia. in a second  fatw, bin laden outlined his objections to american foreign policy with respect to the state of israel, as well as the continued presence of american troops in saudi arabia after the gulf war. a subscriber to the athari  and wahhabi school of islamic theology, bin laden used islamic quran texts to exhort muslims to attack americans until the stated grievances were reversed. according to bin laden, muslim legal scholars had throughout islamic history unanimously agreed that the jihad is an individual duty if the enemy destroys the muslim countries.the hamburg cell in germany included radical islamists who eventually came to be key operatives in the / attacks. mohamed atta; marwan alshehhi; ziad jarrah; ramzi bin alshibh; and said bahaji were all members of alqaedas hamburg cell.

bin laden orchestrated the attacks. he initially denied involvement, but later recanted his false statements. al jazeera broadcast a statement by him on september ,  i stress that i have not carried out this act, which appears to have been carried out by individuals with their own motivation. in november , u.s. forces recovered a videotape from a destroyed house in jalalabad, afghanistan. in the video, bin laden, talking to khaled alharbi, admitted foreknowledge of the attacks. on december , , a second video of bin laden was released in which he, stopping short of admitting responsibility for the attacks, said

it has become clear that the west in general and america in particular have an unspeakable hatred for islam. ... it is the hatred of crusaders. terrorism against america deserves to be praised because it was a response to injustice, aimed at forcing america to stop its support for israel, which kills our people. ... we say that the end of the united states is imminent, whether bin laden or his followers are alive or dead, for the awakening of the muslim ummah nation has occurred. ... it is important to hit the economy , which is the base of its military power...if the economy is hit they will become reoccupied.

shortly before the  u.s. presidential election, bin laden used a taped statement to publicly acknowledge alqaedas involvement in the attacks. he admitted his direct link to the attacks and said they were carried out because

 the events that affected my soul in a direct way started in  when america permitted the israelis to invade lebanon and the american sixth fleet helped them in that. this bombardment began and many were killed and injured and others were terrorised and displaced.

i couldnt forget those moving scenes, blood and severed limbs, women and children sprawled everywhere. houses destroyed along with their occupants and high rises demolished over their residents, rockets raining down on our home without mercy...and as i looked at those demolished towers in lebanon, it entered my mind that we should punish the oppressor in kind and that we should destroy towers in america in order that they taste some of what we tasted and so that they be deterred from killing our women and children.

and that day, it was confirmed to me that oppression and the intentional killing of innocent women and children is a deliberate american policy. destruction is freedom and democracy, while resistance is terrorism and intolerance. bin laden said that he had personally directed his followers to attack the world trade center and the pentagon. another video obtained by al jazeera in september  showed bin laden with one of the attacks chief planners, ramzi bin alshibh, as well as hijackers, hamza alghamdi and wail alshehri, amidst making preparations for the attacks. bin laden had been on the fbis most wanted list since  for the  bombings of the u.s. embassies in tanzania and kenya.

journalist yosri fouda of the arabic television channel al jazeera reported that in april  alqaeda member khalid sheikh mohammed admitted his involvement in the attacks, along with ramzi bin alshibh. the  / commission report determined that the animosity towards the united states felt by mohammed, the principal architect of the / attacks, stemmed from his violent disagreement with u.s. foreign policy favoring israel. mohammed was also an adviser and financier of the  world trade center bombing and the uncle of ramzi yousef, the lead bomber in that attack. in late , mohammed and yousef moved on to plan a new terrorist attack called the bojinka plot planned for january . despite a failure and yousefs capture by u.s. forces the following month, the bojinka plot would highly influence the later / attacks.in substitution for testimony of khalid sheikh mohammed from the trial of zacarias moussaoui, five people are identified as having been completely aware of the operations details. they are bin laden; khalid sheikh mohammed; ramzi bin alshibh; abu turab alurduni; and mohammed atef.

osama bin ladens declaration of a holy war against the united states, and a  fatw signed by bin laden and others, calling for the killing of americans, are seen by investigators as evidence of his motivation.in bin ladens november  letter to america, he explicitly stated that alqaedas motives for the attacks included

u.s. support of israel

to support and globally expand the alaqsa intifada

the attacks against muslims in somalia

support of the philippines against muslims in the moro conflict

support for israeli aggression against muslims in lebanon

support of russian atrocities against muslims in chechnya

proamerican governments in the middle east  being against muslim interests

support of indian oppression against muslims in kashmir

the presence of u.s. troops in saudi arabia

the sanctions against iraq

environmental destruction

after the attacks, bin laden and ayman alzawahiri released additional videotapes and audio recordings, some of which repeated those reasons for the attacks. two particularly important publications were bin ladens  letter to america and a  videotape by bin laden.bin laden interpreted muhammad as having banned the permanent presence of infidels in arabia. in , bin laden issued a fatw calling for american troops to leave saudi arabia. in , alqaeda wrote for over seven years the united states has been occupying the lands of islam in the holiest of places, the arabian peninsula, plundering its riches, dictating to its rulers, humiliating its people, terrorizing its neighbors, and turning its bases in the peninsula into a spearhead through which to fight the neighboring muslim peoples.in a december  interview, bin laden said he felt that americans were too near to mecca, and considered this a provocation to the entire muslim world. one analysis of suicide terrorism suggested that without u.s. troops in saudi arabia, alqaeda likely would not have been able to get people to commit to suicide missions.in the  fatw, alqaeda identified the iraq sanctions as a reason to kill americans, condemning the protracted blockade among other actions that constitute a declaration of war against allah, his messenger, and muslims. the fatw declared that the ruling to kill the americans and their allies  civilians and military  is an individual duty for every muslim who can do it in any country in which it is possible to do it, in order to liberate the alaqsa mosque and the holy mosque of mecca from their grip, and in order for their the americans armies to move out of all the lands of islam, defeated and unable to threaten any muslim.in , bin laden claimed that the idea of destroying the towers had first occurred to him in , when he witnessed israels bombardment of highrise apartment buildings during the  lebanon war. some analysts, including political scientists john mearsheimer and stephen walt, also claimed that u.s. support of israel was one motive for the attacks. in  and , bin laden again connected the september  attacks with u.s. support of israel, although most of the letter expressed bin ladens disdain for president bush and bin ladens hope to destroy and bankrupt the u.s.other motives have been suggested in addition to those stated by bin laden and alqaeda. some authors suggested the humiliation that resulted from the islamic world falling behind the western world  this discrepancy was rendered especially visible by globalization and a desire to provoke the u.s. into a broader war against the islamic world in the hope of motivating more allies to support alqaeda. similarly, others have argued that / was a strategic move with the objective of provoking america into a war that would incite a panislamic revolution.documents seized during the  operation that killed bin laden included a few notes handwritten by bin laden in september  with the heading the birth of the idea of september . in these notes he describes how he was inspired by the crash of egyptair flight  on october , , which was deliberately crashed by copilot gameel albatouti. this is how the idea of / was conceived and developed in my head, and that is when we began the planning bin laden continued, adding that no one but abu hafs and abu alkhair knew about it at the time. the / commission report identified khalid sheikh mohammed as the architect of /, but he is not mentioned in bin ladens notes.

the attacks were conceived by khalid sheikh mohammed, who first presented it to osama bin laden in . at that time, bin laden and alqaeda were in a period of transition, having just relocated back to afghanistan from sudan. the  african embassy bombings and bin ladens february  fatw marked a turning point of alqaedas terrorist operation, as bin laden became intent on attacking the united states.

in late  or early , bin laden gave approval for mohammed to go forward with organizing the plot. mohammed, bin laden, and mohammed atef, the deputy of bin laden, held a series of meetings in early . atef provided operational support, including target selections and helping arrange travel for the hijackers. bin laden overruled mohammed, rejecting potential targets such as the u.s. bank tower in los angeles for lack of time.bin laden provided leadership and financial support and was involved in selecting participants. he initially selected nawaf alhazmi and khalid almihdhar, both experienced jihadists who had fought in bosnia. hazmi and mihdhar arrived in the united states in midjanuary . in early , hazmi and mihdhar took flying lessons in san diego, california. both spoke little english, performed poorly in flying lessons, and eventually served as secondary muscle hijackers.in late , a group of men from hamburg, germany, arrived in afghanistan. the group included mohamed atta, marwan alshehhi, ziad jarrah, and ramzi bin alshibh. bin laden selected these men because they were educated, could speak english, and had experience living in the west. new recruits were routinely screened for special skills and alqaeda leaders consequently discovered that hani hanjour already had a commercial pilots license. mohammed later said that he helped the hijackers blend in by teaching them how to order food in restaurants and dress in western clothing.hanjour arrived in san diego on december , , joining hazmi. they soon left for arizona, where hanjour took refresher training. marwan alshehhi arrived at the end of may , while atta arrived on june , , and jarrah arrived on june , . bin alshibh applied several times for a visa to the united states, but as a yemeni, he was rejected out of concerns he would overstay his visa., bin alshibh stayed in hamburg, providing coordination between atta and mohammed. the three hamburg cell members all took pilot training in south florida at huffman aviation.in the spring of , the secondary hijackers began arriving in the united states. in july , atta met with bin alshibh in tarragona, catalonia, spain, where they coordinated details of the plot, including final target selection. bin alshibh also passed along bin ladens wish for the attacks to be carried out as soon as possible. some of the hijackers received passports from corrupt saudi officials who were family members or used fraudulent passports to gain entry.there have been a few theories that / was selected by the hijackers as the date of the attack because of its resemblance to , the phone number used to report emergencies in the united states. however, lawrence wright wrote that the hijackers chose the date when john iii sobieski, the king of poland and grand duke of lithuania, began the battle that turned back the ottoman empires muslim armies that were attempting to capture vienna  on  september . during , vienna was the seat of the holy roman empire and habsburg monarchy, both major powers in europe at the time. for osama bin laden, this was a date when the west gained some dominance over islam, and by attacking on this date, he hoped to make a step in islam winning the war for worldwide power and influence.

in late , alqaeda associate walid bin attash  contacted mihdhar, telling him to meet him in kuala lumpur, malaysia; hazmi and abu bara al yemeni would also be in attendance. the nsa intercepted a telephone call mentioning the meeting, mihdhar, and the name nawaf . while the agency feared something nefarious might be afoot, it took no further action.

the cia had already been alerted by saudi intelligence about the status of mihdhar and hazmi as alqaeda members, and a cia team broke into mihdhars dubai hotel room and discovered that mihdhar had a u.s. visa. while alec station alerted intelligence agencies worldwide about this fact, it did not share this information with the fbi. the malaysian special branch observed the january , , meeting of the two alqaeda members and informed the cia that mihdhar, hazmi, and khallad were flying to bangkok, but the cia never notified other agencies of this, nor did it ask the state department to put mihdhar on its watchlist. an fbi liaison to alec station asked permission to inform the fbi of the meeting but was told this is not a matter for the fbi.by late june, senior counterterrorism official richard clarke and cia director george tenet were convinced that a major series of attacks was about to come, although the cia believed the attacks would likely occur in saudi arabia or israel. in early july, clarke put domestic agencies on full alert, telling them something really spectacular is going to happen here. soon. he asked the fbi and the state department to alert the embassies and police departments, and the defense department to go to threat condition delta. clarke later wrote somewhere in cia there was information that two known al qaeda terrorists had come into the united states. somewhere in fbi, there was information that strange things had been going on at flight schools in the united states ... they had specific information about individual terrorists from which one could have deduced what was about to happen. none of that information got to me or the white house.on july , tom wilshire, a cia agent assigned to the fbis international terrorism division, emailed his superiors at the cias counterterrorism center  requesting permission to inform the fbi that hazmi was in the country and that mihdhar had a u.s. visa. the cia never responded.the same day in july, margarette gillespie, an fbi analyst working in the ctc, was told to review material about the malaysia meeting. she was not told of the participants presence in the u.s. the cia gave gillespie surveillance photos of mihdhar and hazmi from the meeting to show to fbi counterterrorism, but did not tell her their significance. the intelink database informed her not to share intelligence material on the meeting with criminal investigators. when shown the photos, the fbi were refused more details on their significance, and they were not given mihdhars date of birth nor passport number. in late august , gillespie told the ins, the state department, the customs service, and the fbi to put hazmi and mihdhar on their watchlists, but the fbi was prohibited from using criminal agents in searching for the duo, hindering their efforts.also in july, a phoenixbased fbi agent sent a message to fbi headquarters, alec station, and fbi agents in new york alerting them to the possibility of a coordinated effort by osama bin laden to send students to the united states to attend civil aviation universities and colleges. the agent, kenneth williams, suggested the need to interview all flight school managers and identify all arab students seeking flight training. in july, jordan alerted the u.s. that alqaeda was planning an attack on the u.s.; months later, jordan notified the u.s. that the attacks codename was the big wedding and that it involved airplanes.on august , , the cias presidential daily brief , designated for the president only, was entitled bin ladin determined to strike in us. the memo noted that fbi information indicates patterns of suspicious activity in this country consistent with preparations for hijackings or other types of attacks.in midaugust, one minnesota flight school alerted the fbi about zacarias moussaoui, who had asked suspicious questions. the fbi found that moussaoui was a radical who had traveled to pakistan, and the ins arrested him for overstaying his french visa. their request to search his laptop was denied by fbi headquarters due to the lack of probable cause.the failures in intelligencesharing were attributed to  justice department policies limiting intelligence sharing, combined with cia and nsa reluctance to reveal sensitive sources and methods such as tapped phones. testifying before the / commission in april , then  attorney general john ashcroft recalled that the single greatest structural cause for the september th problem was the wall that segregated or separated criminal investigators and intelligence agents. clarke also wrote there were... failures to get information to the right place at the right time.

early on the morning of september , , nineteen hijackers took control of four commercial airliners  en route to california  after takeoffs from logan international airport in boston, massachusetts; newark liberty international airport in newark, new jersey; and washington dulles international airport in loudoun and fairfax counties in virginia. large planes with long coasttocoast flights were selected for hijacking because they would have more fuel.the four flights were

american airlines flight  a boeing  aircraft, departed logan airport at  a.m. en route to los angeles with a crew of  and  passengers, not including five hijackers. the hijackers flew the plane into the northern faade of the north tower of the world trade center in new york city at  a.m.

united airlines flight  a boeing  aircraft, departed logan airport at  a.m. en route to los angeles with a crew of nine and  passengers, not including five hijackers. the hijackers flew the plane into the southern faade of the south tower of the world trade center in new york city at  a.m.

american airlines flight  a boeing  aircraft, departed washington dulles international airport at  a.m. en route to los angeles with a crew of six and  passengers, not including five hijackers. the hijackers flew the plane into the western faade of the pentagon in arlington county, virginia, at  a.m.

united airlines flight  a boeing  aircraft, departed newark international airport at  a.m. en route to san francisco, with a crew of seven and  passengers, not including four hijackers. as passengers attempted to subdue the hijackers, the aircraft crashed into a field in stonycreek township, pennsylvania, near shanksville, at  a.m.media coverage was extensive during the attacks and aftermath, beginning moments after the first crash into the world trade center.

 eastern daylight time  excluding hijackers including emergency workers including hijackers

at  a.m., american airlines flight  took off from logan international airport in boston. fifteen minutes into the flight, five hijackers armed with boxcutters took over the plane, injuring at least three people  before forcing their way into the cockpit. the terrorists also displayed an apparent explosive device in order to frighten the hostages into submission, while additionally spraying mace into the cabin to further hinder any efforts to resist. back at logan, united airlines flight  took off at  a.m., approximately the same time as flight s hijacking. hundreds of miles southwest at dulles international airport in fairfax and loudoun counties, virginia, american airlines flight  left the runway at  a.m. flight s journey proceeded normally for  minutes until  a.m., when another group of five hijacked the plane, murdering both pilots and stabbing several crew members before assuming control of the aircraft. as was the case with flight , the hijackers used bomb threats to instill fear into the passengers and crew and sprayed chemical weapons to disable any opposition. concurrently, united airlines flight  departed from newark international airport in new jersey; originally scheduled to pull away from the gate at  a.m., the plane was running  minutes late.

at  a.m., flight  became the first plane to reach its target when it was deliberately crashed into the north face of the world trade centers north tower , although the initial presumption by many was that this was merely an accident. at  a.m., shortly after the north tower was struck and only minutes following the hijacking of flight , american airlines flight  was also taken over by another group of five who forcibly entered the cockpit  minutes after takeoff. although the hijackers were equipped with knives, there were no reports of anyone on board actually being stabbed unlike the first two planes, nor did the two people who made phone calls mention the use of mace or a bomb threat of any kind. seventeen minutes after the first plane crashed into the north tower, flight  was flown into the south towers southern facade  at  a.m., instantly proving to the entire world that the first crash was not an accident but that a terrorist attack was underway. after waiting  minutes to make their movea holdup that proved disastrous for the terrorists when combined with the delayed takeoff from the runwayfour men aboard flight  struck suddenly, killing at least one passenger before storming the cockpit and seizing control of the plane at  a.m., turning the plane eastbound and setting course for washington, d.c. much like their counterparts on the first two flights, the fourth team also used bomb threats to get their way and again filled the cabin with mace. nine minutes after flight s hijacking, flight  was crashed into the west side of the pentagon. because of the two delays, the passengers and crew of flight  had time to be made aware of the previous attacks through phone calls to the ground. knowing their lives were forfeited rendered the bomb threat moot, and an uprising was hastily organized in the hopes of taking control of the aircraft, with an assault on the hijackers being launched at  a.m. within minutes, they had fought their way to the front of the cabin and began breaking down the cockpit door. fearing their captives would gain the upper hand, the hijackers rolled the plane and pitched it into a nosedive, crashing into a field near shanksville, pennsylvania, southeast of pittsburgh, at  a.m. the plane was around twenty minutes away from reaching d.c. at the time of the crash, and its target is believed to have been either the capitol building or the white house.some passengers and crew members who called from the aircraft using the cabin air phone service and mobile phones provided details several hijackers were aboard each plane; they used mace, tear gas, or pepper spray to overcome attendants; and some people aboard had been stabbed. reports indicated hijackers stabbed and killed pilots, flight attendants, and one or more passengers. according to the / commissions final report, the hijackers had recently purchased multifunction hand tools and assorted leathermantype utility knives with locking blades , but were not found among the possessions left behind by the hijackers. a flight attendant on flight , a passenger on flight , and passengers on flight  said the hijackers had bombs, but one of the passengers said he thought the bombs were fake. the fbi found no traces of explosives at the crash sites, and the / commission concluded that the bombs were probably fake. on at least two of the hijacked flights  american  and united   the terrorists tried to ensure nobody would resist by claiming over the pa system that they were taking hostages and were returning to the airport to have a ransom demand met, an obvious attempt to deceive those onboard into staying put by way of a false hope. both of these attempts fell on deaf ears, however, as the hijacker pilots in both instances  keyed the wrong switch and mistakenly transmitted their messages to atc instead of the people on the plane as intended, in the process tipping off the flight controllers that the planes had been hijacked.

three buildings in the world trade center collapsed due to fireinduced structural failure. although the south tower was struck  minutes after the north tower, the planes impact zone was far lower, at a much faster speed, and into a corner, with the unevenlybalanced additional structural weight causing it to collapse first at  a.m., having burned for  minutes in the fire caused by the crash of united airlines flight  and the explosion of its fuel. the north tower lasted another  minutes before collapsing at  a.m., one hour and fortytwo minutes after being struck by american airlines flight . when the north tower collapsed, debris fell on the nearby  world trade center building , damaging the building and starting fires. these fires burned for nearly seven hours, compromising the buildings structural integrity, and  wtc collapsed at  p.m. the west side of the pentagon sustained significant damage.

at  a.m., the federal aviation administration  grounded all civilian aircraft within the continental u.s., and civilian aircraft already in flight were told to land immediately. all international civilian aircraft were either turned back or redirected to airports in canada or mexico, and were banned from landing on united states territory for three days. the attacks created widespread confusion among news organizations and air traffic controllers. among the unconfirmed and often contradictory news reports aired throughout the day, one of the most prevalent said a car bomb had been detonated at the u.s. state departments headquarters in washington, d.c. another jet  was suspected of having been hijacked, but the aircraft responded to controllers and landed safely in cleveland, ohio.in an april  interview, khalid sheikh mohammed and ramzi bin alshibh, who are believed to have organized the attacks, said flight s intended target was the united states capitol, not the white house. during the planning stage of the attacks, mohamed atta  thought the white house might be too tough a target and sought an assessment from hani hanjour . mohammed said alqaeda initially planned to target nuclear installations rather than the world trade center and the pentagon, but decided against it, fearing things could get out of control. final decisions on targets, according to mohammed, were left in the hands of the pilots. if any pilot could not reach his intended target, he was to crash the plane.

in new york city, the attack on the world trade centers north tower singlehandedly made / the deadliest act of terrorism in world history. our world in data described it as the deadliest terrorist act in human history.  taken together, the four crashes caused the deaths of , people  and injured thousands more. the death toll included  on the four planes ; , in the world trade center and in the surrounding area; and  at the pentagon. most who died were civilians; the rest included  firefighters,  law enforcement officers,  military personnel, and the  terrorists. after new york, new jersey lost the most state citizens. more than  countries lost citizens in the attacks.in new york city, more than  of the workers and visitors who died in the towers had been at or above the points of impact. in the north tower, between , and , people were at, above or one floor below the point of impact and all died. hundreds were killed instantly the moment the plane struck. the estimated  people who survived the impact were trapped and died in the fires or from smoke inhalation; fell or jumped from the tower to escape the smoke and flames; or were killed in the buildings collapse. the destruction of all three staircases in the north tower when flight  hit made it impossible for anyone from the impact zone upward to escape.  people not trapped by the impact died. when the plane struck between floors  and , the nd floor was also rendered inescapable when the crash severed all elevator shafts while debris falling from the impact zone blocked the stairwells, ensuring the deaths of all  workers on the final floor below the point of impact.

in the south tower, around  people were on or above the th floor when flight  struck and few survived. as with the north tower, hundreds were killed at the moment of impact. however, unlike those in the north tower, the estimated  survivors of the crash were not technically trapped by the damage done by flight s impact, but most were either unaware that a means of escape still existed or were unable to use it. one stairway, stairwell a, narrowly avoided being destroyed as flight  crashed through the building, allowing  people located on the floors of impact  and four more from the floors above to escape. new york city  operators who received calls from people inside the tower were not well informed of the situation as it rapidly unfolded and as a result, told callers not to descend the tower on their own. in total,  people died in the south tower, fewer than half the number killed in the north tower. of the  people witnessed jumping or falling to their deaths that morning, only three recorded sightings were from the south tower. casualties in the south tower were significantly reduced because some occupants decided to leave the building immediately following the first crash, and because eric eisenberg, an executive at aon insurance, made the decision to evacuate the floors occupied by aon  in the moments following the impact of flight . the minute gap allowed over  of the , aon employees present onsite to evacuate from above the th floor before the south tower was struck; eisenberg was among the nearly  who did not escape. similar preimpact evacuations were carried out by companies such as fiduciary trust, csc, and euro brokers, all of whom had offices on floors above the point of impact. the failure to order a full evacuation of the south tower after the first plane crash into the north tower was described by usa today as one of the days great tragedies.as exemplified in the photograph the falling man, more than  people fell to their deaths from the burning towers, most of whom were forced to jump in order to escape the extreme heat, fire and smoke. some occupants of each tower above the point of impact made their way toward the roof in the hope of helicopter rescue, but the roof access doors were locked. no plan existed for helicopter rescues, and the combination of roof equipment, thick smoke and intense heat prevented helicopters from approaching.at the world trade center complex, a total of  emergency workers died as they tried to rescue people and fight fires, while another law enforcement officer was separately killed onboard united  as it crashed. the new york city fire department  lost  firefighters, including a chaplain and two paramedics. the new york city police department  lost  officers. the port authority police department  lost  officers. eight emergency medical technicians  and paramedics from private emergency medical services  units were killed. almost all of the emergency personnel who died at the scene that day were killed as a result of the towers collapsing, with the exception of one who died when a civilian who fell from the upper floors of the south tower landed on him.cantor fitzgerald l.p.  lost  employees, considerably more than any other employer. marsh inc., located immediately below cantor fitzgerald on floors , lost  employees, and  employees of aon corporation were also killed. the national institute of standards and technology  estimated that about , civilians were in the world trade center complex at the time of the attacks. turnstile counts from the port authority suggest , people were typically in the twin towers by  a.m. most people below the impact zone safely evacuated the buildings.in arlington county, virginia,  pentagon workers died when flight  crashed into the buildings western side.  were civilians and  were military personnel, many of whom worked for the united states army or the united states navy. the army lost  civilian employees; six civilian contractors; and  soldiers, while the navy lost six civilian employees; three civilian contractors; and  sailors. seven defense intelligence agency  civilian employees died, and one office of the secretary of defense  contractor. lieutenant general timothy maude, an army deputy chief of staff, was the highestranking military official killed at the pentagon.weeks after the attack, the death toll was estimated to be over ,, more than twice the number of deaths eventually confirmed. the city was only able to identify remains for about , of the world trade center victims. the medical examiners office collected about , unidentified bone and tissue fragments that cannot be matched to the list of the dead. bone fragments were still being found in  by workers who were preparing to demolish the damaged deutsche bank building.

in , a team of anthropologists and archaeologists searched for human remains and personal items at the fresh kills landfill, where  more human remains were recovered, bringing the total found to ,. dna profiling continues in an attempt to identify additional victims. the remains are being held in storage in memorial park, outside the new york city medical examiners facilities. it was expected that the remains would be moved in  to a repository behind a wall at the / museum.in july , a team of scientists at the office of chief medical examiner continued efforts to identify remains, in the hope that improved technology will allow them to identify other victims. in august , the ,st victim was identified as a result of newly available dna technology, and a ,nd during july . three more victims were identified in october , two in september  and an additional two in september . as of november , , victims remain unidentified, amounting to  of the deaths in the world trade center attacks. on september , , the fdny reported that with the death of emt hilda vannata and retired firefighter robert fulco, marking the nd and rd deaths from /related illnesses, the department had now lost the same number of firefighters, emts, and civilian members to /related illnesses as it did on the day of the attacks.

along with the floor twin towers, numerous other buildings at the world trade center site were destroyed or badly damaged, including wtc buildings  through  and st. nicholas greek orthodox church. the north tower, south tower, the marriott hotel , and  wtc were destroyed. the u.s. customs house ,  world trade center,  world trade center, and both pedestrian bridges connecting buildings were severely damaged. the deutsche bank building  on  liberty street was partially damaged and demolished some years later, starting in . the two buildings of the world financial center also suffered damage. the last fires at the world trade center site were extinguished on december , exactly  days after the attacks.the deutsche bank building across liberty street from the world trade center complex was later condemned as uninhabitable because of toxic conditions inside the office tower, and was deconstructed. the borough of manhattan community colleges fiterman hall at  west broadway was condemned due to extensive damage from the attacks, and was reopened in .

other neighboring buildings  suffered major damage but have been restored. world financial center buildings, one liberty plaza, the millenium hilton, and  church street had moderate damage and have since been restored. communications equipment on top of the north tower was also destroyed, with only wcbstv maintaining a backup transmitter on the empire state building, but media stations were quickly able to reroute the signals and resume their broadcasts.the path train systems world trade center station was located under the complex. as a result, the entire station was demolished completely when the towers collapsed, and the tunnels leading to exchange place station in jersey city, new jersey, were flooded with water. the station was rebuilt as the  billion world trade center transportation hub, which reopened in march . the cortlandt street station on the new york city subways irt broadwayseventh avenue line was also in close proximity to the world trade center complex, and the entire station, along with the surrounding track, was reduced to rubble. the latter station was rebuilt and reopened to the public on september , .the pentagon was severely damaged by the impact of american airlines flight  and the ensuing fires, causing one section of the building to collapse. as the airplane approached the pentagon, its wings knocked down light poles and its right engine hit a power generator before crashing into the western side of the building. the plane hit the pentagon at the firstfloor level. the front part of the fuselage disintegrated on impact, while the mid and tail sections kept moving for another fraction of a second. debris from the tail section penetrated the furthest into the building, breaking through  feet  of the three outermost of the buildings five rings.

the new york city fire department  deployed more than  units  to the world trade center. their efforts were supplemented by numerous offduty firefighters and emergency medical technicians. the new york city police department  sent its emergency service units and other police personnel and deployed its aviation unit. the nypd aviation unit assessed the situation and decided that helicopter rescues from the towers were not feasible. numerous police officers of the port authority police department  also participated in rescue efforts. once on the scene, the fdny, the nypd, and the papd did not coordinate efforts and performed redundant searches for civilians.as conditions deteriorated, the nypd aviation unit relayed information to police commanders, who issued orders for its personnel to evacuate the towers; most nypd officers were able to safely evacuate before the buildings collapsed. with separate command posts set up and incompatible radio communications between the agencies, warnings were not passed along to fdny commanders.after the first tower collapsed, fdny commanders issued evacuation warnings. due to technical difficulties with malfunctioning radio repeater systems, many firefighters never heard the evacuation orders.  dispatchers also received information from callers that was not passed along to commanders on the scene.

the / attacks resulted in immediate responses to the event, including domestic reactions; closings and cancellations; hate crimes; muslimamerican responses to the event; international responses to the attack; and military responses to the events. an extensive compensation program was quickly established by congress in the aftermath to compensate the victims and families of victims of the / attacks as well.

at  a.m., faa officials were notified flight  had been hijacked and they, in turn, notified the north american aerospace defense command . norad scrambled two fs from otis air national guard base in massachusetts and they were airborne by  a.m. because of slow and confused communication from faa officials, norad had nine minutes notice, and no notice about any of the other flights before they crashed.

after both of the twin towers had already been hit, more fighters were scrambled from langley air force base in virginia at  a.m. at  a.m., vice president dick cheney issued orders to shoot down any commercial aircraft that could be positively identified as being hijacked. these instructions were not relayed in time for the fighters to take action. some fighters took to the air without live ammunition, knowing that to prevent the hijackers from striking their intended targets, the pilots might have to intercept and crash their fighters into the hijacked planes, possibly ejecting at the last moment.for the first time in u.s. history, the emergency preparedness plan called security control of air traffic and air navigation aids  was invoked, thus stranding tens of thousands of passengers across the world. ben sliney, in his first day as the national operations manager of the faa, ordered that american airspace would be closed to all international flights, causing about  flights to be turned back or redirected to other countries. canada received  of the diverted flights and launched operation yellow ribbon to deal with the large numbers of grounded planes and stranded passengers.the / attacks had immediate effects on the american people. police and rescue workers from around the country took a leave of absence from their jobs and traveled to new york city to help recover bodies from the twisted remnants of the twin towers. blood donations across the u.s. surged in the weeks after /.the deaths of adults in the attacks resulted in over , children losing a parent. subsequent studies documented childrens reactions to these actual losses and to feared losses of life, the protective environment in the attacks aftermath, and the effects on surviving caregivers.

following the attacks, president george w. bushs approval rating soared to . on september , , he addressed the nation and a joint session of congress regarding the events of september  and the subsequent nine days of rescue and recovery efforts, and described his intended response to the attacks. new york city mayor rudy giulianis highly visible role won him high praise in new york and nationally.many relief funds were immediately set up to assist the attacks victims, with the task of providing financial assistance to the survivors of the attacks and to the victims families. by the deadline for victims compensation on september , , , applications had been received from the families of those who were killed.contingency plans for the continuity of government and the evacuation of leaders were implemented soon after the attacks. congress was not told that the united states had been under a continuity of government status until february .in the largest restructuring of the u.s. government in contemporary history, the united states enacted the homeland security act of , creating the u.s. department of homeland security. congress also passed the usa patriot act, saying it would help detect and prosecute terrorism and other crimes. civil liberties groups have criticized the patriot act, saying it allows law enforcement to invade citizens privacy and that it eliminates judicial oversight of law enforcement and domestic intelligence.in an effort to effectively combat future acts of terrorism, the national security agency  was given broad powers. nsa commenced warrantless surveillance of telecommunications, which was sometimes criticized since it permitted the agency to eavesdrop on telephone and email communications between the united states and people overseas without a warrant. in response to requests by various intelligence agencies, the united states foreign intelligence surveillance court permitted an expansion of powers by the u.s. government in seeking, obtaining, and sharing information on u.s. citizens as well as nonu.s. people from around the world.

six days after the attacks, president bush made a public appearance at washington, d.c.s largest islamic center and acknowledged the incredibly valuable contribution that millions of american muslims made to their country and called for them to be treated with respect. numerous incidents of harassment and hate crimes against muslims and south asians were reported in the days following the attacks.sikhs were also subject to targeting due to the use of turbans in the sikh faith, which are stereotypically associated with muslims. there were reports of attacks on mosques and other religious buildings , and assaults on individuals, including one murder balbir singh sodhi, a sikh mistaken for a muslim, who was fatally shot on september , , in mesa, arizona. two dozen members of osama bin ladens family were urgently evacuated out of the country on a private charter plane under fbi supervision three days after the attacks.according to an academic study, people perceived to be middle eastern were as likely to be victims of hate crimes as followers of islam during this time. the study also found a similar increase in hate crimes against people who may have been perceived as muslims, arabs, and others thought to be of middle eastern origin. a report by the south asian american advocacy group known as south asian americans leading together documented media coverage of  bias incidents against americans of south asian or middle eastern descent between september  and , . various crimes such as vandalism, arson, assault, shootings, harassment, and threats in numerous places were documented. women wearing hijab were also targeted.

a poll of arabamericans, conducted in may , found that  had personally experienced discrimination since september . a july  poll of muslim americans found that  believed their lives had changed for the worse since september , and  had experienced an act of bias or discrimination.following the september  attacks, many pakistani americans identified themselves as indians to avoid potential discrimination and obtain jobs .by may , there were  complaints of employment discrimination reported to the u.s. equal employment opportunity commission .  of those were complaints from people fired from their jobs. similarly, by june , the u.s. department of transportation  had investigated  september threlated complaints from airline passengers purporting that their religious or ethnic appearance caused them to be singled out at security screenings. dot investigated an additional  complaints from people who alleged they were completely blocked from boarding airplanes on the same grounds.

muslim organizations in the united states were swift to condemn the attacks and called upon muslim americans to come forward with their skills and resources to help alleviate the sufferings of the affected people and their families. these organizations included the islamic society of north america, american muslim alliance, american muslim council, council on americanislamic relations, islamic circle of north america, and the sharia scholars association of north america. along with monetary donations, many islamic organizations launched blood drives and provided medical assistance, food, and shelter for victims.

curiosity about islam increased after the attacks. as a result, many mosques and islamic centers began holding open houses and participating in outreach efforts to educate nonmuslims about the faith. in the first  years after the attacks, interfaith community service increased from  to  percent and the percentage of u.s. congregations involved in interfaith worship doubled from  to  percent.

the attacks were denounced by mass media and governments worldwide. across the globe, nations offered proamerican support and solidarity. leaders in most middle eastern countries, as well as libya and afghanistan, condemned the attacks. iraq was a notable exception, with an immediate official statement that, the american cowboys are reaping the fruit of their crimes against humanity. the government of saudi arabia officially condemned the attacks, but privately many saudis favored bin ladens cause.although palestinian authority  president yasser arafat also condemned the attacks, there were reports of celebrations of disputed size in the west bank, gaza strip, and east jerusalem. palestinian leaders discredited news broadcasters that justified the attacks or showed celebrations, and the authority claimed such celebrations do not represent the palestinians sentiment, adding that it would not allow a few kids to smear the real face of the palestinians. footage by cnn and other news outlets were suggested by a report originating at a brazilian university to be from ; this was later proven to be a false accusation, resulting in a statement being issued by cnn. as in the united states, the aftermath of the attacks saw tensions increase in other countries between muslims and nonmuslims.united nations security council resolution  condemned the attacks and expressed readiness to take all necessary steps to respond and combat all forms of terrorism in accordance with their charter. numerous countries introduced antiterrorism legislation and froze bank accounts they suspected of alqaeda ties. law enforcement and intelligence agencies in a number of countries arrested alleged terrorists.british prime minister tony blair said britain stood shoulder to shoulder with the united states. a few days later, blair flew to washington, d.c., to affirm british solidarity with the united states. in a speech to congress nine days after the attacks, which blair attended as a guest, president bush declared america has no truer friend than great britain. subsequently, prime minister blair embarked on two months of diplomacy to rally international support for military action; he held  meetings with world leaders and traveled more than , miles .the u.s. set up the guantanamo bay detention camp to hold inmates they defined as illegal enemy combatants. the legitimacy of these detentions has been questioned by the european union and human rights organizations.on september , , irans fifth president, mohammad khatami, meeting british foreign secretary jack straw, said iran fully understands the feelings of the americans about the terrorist attacks in new york and washington on september . he said although the american administrations had been at best indifferent about terrorist operations in iran , the iranians felt differently and had expressed their sympathetic feelings with bereaved americans in the tragic incidents in the two cities. he also stated that nations should not be punished in place of terrorists.according to radio fardas website, when the news of the attacks was released, some iranian citizens gathered in front of the embassy of switzerland in tehran, which serves as the protecting power of the united states in iran , to express their sympathy, and some of them lit candles as a symbol of mourning. this piece of news at radio fardas website also states that in , on the anniversary of the attacks, the united states department of state published a post at its blog, in which the department thanked the iranian people for their sympathy and stated that it would never forget iranian peoples kindness on those harsh days. after the attacks, both the president and the supreme leader of iran, condemned the attacks. the bbc and time magazine published reports on holding candlelit vigils for the victims by iranian citizens on their websites. according to politico magazine, following the attacks, ali khamenei, the supreme leader of iran, suspended the usual death to america chants at friday prayers temporarily.in september , shortly after the attacks, some fans of aek athens burned an israeli flag and unsuccessfully tried to burn an american flag. though the american flag did not catch fire, the fans booed during a moment of silence for victims of the attacks.

at  p.m. on september , secretary of defense donald rumsfeld was issuing rapid orders to his aides to look for evidence of iraqi involvement. according to notes taken by senior policy official stephen cambone, rumsfeld asked for, best info fast. judge whether good enough hit s.h. saddam hussein at same time. not only ubl osama bin laden. cambones notes quoted rumsfeld as saying, need to move swiftly  near term target needs  go massive  sweep it all up. things related and not.in a meeting at camp david on september  the bush administration rejected the idea of attacking iraq in response to the september  attacks. nonetheless, they later invaded the country with allies, citing saddam husseins support for terrorism. at the time, as many as seven in ten americans believed the iraqi president played a role in the / attacks. three years later, bush conceded that he had not.the nato council declared that the terrorist attacks on the united states were an attack on all nato nations that satisfied article  of the nato charter. this marked the first invocation of article , which had been written during the cold war with an attack by the soviet union in mind. australian prime minister john howard, who was in washington, d.c., during the attacks, invoked article iv of the anzus treaty. the bush administration announced a war on terror, with the stated goals of bringing bin laden and alqaeda to justice and preventing the emergence of other terrorist networks. these goals would be accomplished by imposing economic and military sanctions against states harboring terrorists, and increasing global surveillance and intelligence sharing.on september , , the u.s. congress passed the authorization for use of military force against terrorists. it is still in effect, and grants the president the authority to use all necessary and appropriate force against those whom he determined planned, authorized, committed or aided the september  attacks or who harbored said persons or groups.on october , , the war in afghanistan began when u.s. and british forces initiated aerial bombing campaigns targeting taliban and alqaeda camps, then later invaded afghanistan with ground troops of the special forces. this eventually led to the overthrow of the talibans rule of afghanistan with the fall of kandahar on december , , by u.s.led coalition forces.

alqaeda leader osama bin laden, who went into hiding in the white mountains, was targeted by u.s. coalition forces in the battle of tora bora, but he escaped across the pakistani border and would remain out of sight for almost ten years. in an interview with tayseer allouni in  october , bin laden stated the events proved the extent of terrorism that america exercises in the world. bush stated that the world has to be divided in two bush and his supporters, and any country that doesnt get into the global crusade is with the terrorists. what terrorism is clearer than this many governments were forced to support this new terrorism... america wouldnt live in security until we live it truly in palestine. this showed the reality of america, which puts israels interest above its own peoples interest. america wont get out of this crisis until it gets out of the arabian peninsula, and until it stops its support of israel.

the philippines and indonesia, among other nations with their own internal conflicts with islamic terrorism, also increased their military readiness. the military forces of the united states of america and the islamic republic of iran cooperated with each other to overthrow the taliban regime, which had had conflicts with the government of iran. irans quds force helped u.s. forces and afghan rebels in the  uprising in herat.

hundreds of thousands of tons of toxic debris containing more than , contaminants, including known carcinogens, were spread across lower manhattan due to the twin towers collapse. exposure to the toxins in the debris is alleged to have contributed to fatal or debilitating illnesses among people who were at ground zero. the bush administration ordered the environmental protection agency  to issue reassuring statements regarding air quality in the aftermath of the attacks, citing national security, but the epa did not determine that air quality had returned to preseptember  levels until june .health effects extended to residents, students, and office workers of lower manhattan and nearby chinatown. several deaths have been linked to the toxic dust, and the victims names were included in the world trade center memorial. approximately , people have been estimated to have developed illnesses as a result of the toxic dust. there is also scientific speculation that exposure to various toxic products in the air may have negative effects on fetal development. a study of rescue workers released in april  found that all those studied had impaired lung functions, and that  were reporting little or no improvement in persistent symptoms that started within the first year of the attack.years after the attacks, legal disputes over the costs of illnesses related to the attacks were still in the court system. on october , , a federal judge rejected new york citys refusal to pay for health costs for rescue workers, allowing for the possibility of numerous suits against the city. government officials have been faulted for urging the public to return to lower manhattan in the weeks shortly after the attacks. christine todd whitman, administrator of the epa in the attacks aftermath, was heavily criticized by a u.s. district judge for incorrectly saying that the area was environmentally safe. mayor giuliani was criticized for urging financial industry personnel to return quickly to the greater wall street area.on december , , the united states congress passed the james l. zadroga / health and compensation act, which president barack obama signed into law on january , . it allocated . billion to create the world trade center health program, which provides testing and treatment for people suffering from longterm health problems related to the / attacks. the wtc health program replaced preexisting /related health programs such as the medical monitoring and treatment program and the wtc environmental health center program.in , the nypd confirmed that  nypd police officers had died due to /related illnesses. in september , the fdny confirmed that the total number of firefighters that died due to /related illnesses was . both agencies believe that the death toll will rise dramatically in the coming years. the port authority of new york and new jersey police department , the law enforcement agency with jurisdiction over the world trade center due to the port authority of new york and new jersey owning the site confirmed that four of its police officers have died of /related illnesses. the chief of the papd at the time, joseph morris, made sure that industrialgrade respirators were provided to all papd police officers within  hours and decided that the same  to  police officers would be stationed at the world trade center pile, drastically lowering the number of total papd personnel who would be exposed to the air. the fdny and nypd had rotated hundreds, if not thousands, of different personnel from all over new york city to the pile, which exposed many of them to dust that would give them cancer or other diseases years or decades later. also, they werent given adequate respirators and breathing equipment that could have prevented future diseases.

the attacks had a significant economic impact on united states and world markets. the stock exchanges did not open on september  and remained closed until september . reopening, the dow jones industrial average  fell  points, or ., to , a recordsetting oneday point decline. by the end of the week, the djia had fallen ,. points , at the time its largest oneweek point drop in history. in  dollars, u.s. stocks lost . trillion in valuation for the week.in new york city, about , jobmonths and . billion in wages were lost in the first three months after the attacks. the economic effects were mainly on the economys export sectors. the citys gdp was estimated to have declined by . billion for the last three months of  and all of . the u.s. government provided . billion in immediate assistance to the government of new york city in september , and . billion in early  for economic development and infrastructure needs.also hurt were small businesses in lower manhattan near the world trade center , resulting in lost jobs and their consequent wages. assistance was provided by small business administration loans; federal government community development block grants; and economic injury disaster loans. some ,, square feet  of lower manhattan office space was damaged or destroyed. many wondered whether these jobs would return, and if the damaged tax base would recover. studies of /s economic effects show the manhattan office realestate market and office employment were less affected than first feared, because of the financial services industrys need for facetoface interaction.north american air space was closed for several days after the attacks and air travel decreased upon its reopening, leading to a nearly  cutback in air travel capacity, and exacerbating financial problems in the struggling u.s. airline industry.the september  attacks also led to the u.s. wars in afghanistan and iraq, as well as additional homeland security spending, totaling at least  trillion.

most of the afghan population was already going hungry at the time of the september  attacks. in the aftermath of the attacks, tens of thousands of people attempted to flee afghanistan due to the possibility of military retaliation by the united states. pakistan, already home to many afghan refugees from previous conflicts, closed its border with afghanistan on september , . thousands of afghans also fled to the frontier with tajikistan, although were denied entry. the taliban leaders in afghanistan themselves pleaded against military action, saying we appeal to the united states not to put afghanistan into more misery because our people have suffered so much, referring to two decades of conflict and the humanitarian crisis attached to it.all united nations expatriates had left afghanistan after the attacks and no national or international aid workers were at their post. workers were instead preparing in bordering countries like pakistan, china and uzbekistan to prevent a potential humanitarian catastrophe, amid a critically low food stock for the afghan population. the world food programme stopped importing wheat to afghanistan on september  due to security risks. the wall street journal suggested the creation of a buffer zone in an inevitable war, similarly as in the bosnian war.

approximately one month after the attacks, the united states led a broad coalition of international forces to overthrow the taliban regime from afghanistan for their harboring of alqaeda. though pakistani authorities were initially reluctant to align themselves with the united states against the taliban, they permitted the coalition access to their military bases, and arrested and handed over to the u.s. over  suspected alqaeda members.in a speech by the nizari ismaili imam at the nobel institute in , aga khan iv stated that the / attack on the united states was a direct consequence of the international community ignoring the human tragedy that was afghanistan at that time.in , the u.s. and nato under president obama initiated a drawdown of troops in afghanistan finalized in . during the presidencies of donald trump and joe biden in  and , the united states alongside its nato allies withdrew all troops from afghanistan completing the withdrawal of all regular u.s. troops on august , ,  days before the th anniversary of the september  attacks, the withdrawal marked the end of the  war in afghanistan. biden said that after nearly  years of war, it was clear that the u.s. military could not transform afghanistan into a modern democracy.the second emir of alqaeda, ayman alzawahiri, a close associate of bin laden, was killed in a u.s. drone strike at his home in kabul, afghanistan on july , .

the impact of / extends beyond geopolitics and into society and culture in general. immediate responses to / included greater focus on home life and time spent with family, higher church attendance, and increased expressions of patriotism such as the flying of american flags. the radio industry responded by removing certain songs from playlists, and the attacks have subsequently been used as background, narrative, or thematic elements in film, music, literature, and humor. alreadyrunning television shows as well as programs developed after / have reflected post/ cultural concerns./ conspiracy theories have become social phenomena, despite lack of support from expert scientists, engineers, and historians. / has also had a major impact on the religious faith of many individuals; for some it strengthened, to find consolation to cope with the loss of loved ones and overcome their grief; others started to question their faith or lose it entirely, because they could not reconcile it with their view of religion.the culture of america succeeding the attacks is noted for heightened security and an increased demand thereof, as well as paranoia and anxiety regarding future terrorist attacks that includes most of the nation. psychologists have also confirmed that there has been an increased amount of national anxiety in commercial air travel. antimuslim hate crimes rose nearly tenfold in  and have subsequently remained roughly five times higher than the pre/ rate.

as a result of the attacks, many governments across the world passed legislation to combat terrorism. in germany, where several of the / terrorists had resided and taken advantage of that countrys liberal asylum policies, two major antiterrorism packages were enacted. the first removed legal loopholes that permitted terrorists to live and raise money in germany. the second addressed the effectiveness and communication of intelligence and law enforcement. canada passed the canadian antiterrorism act, their first antiterrorism law. the united kingdom passed the antiterrorism, crime and security act  and the prevention of terrorism act . new zealand enacted the terrorism suppression act .in the united states, the department of homeland security was created by the homeland security act of  to coordinate domestic antiterrorism efforts. the usa patriot act gave the federal government greater powers, including the authority to detain foreign terror suspects for a week without charge; to monitor terror suspects telephone communications, email, and internet use; and to prosecute suspected terrorists without time restrictions. the faa ordered that airplane cockpits be reinforced to prevent terrorists gaining control of planes, and assigned sky marshals to flights.

further, the aviation and transportation security act made the federal government, rather than airports, responsible for airport security. the law created the transportation security administration to inspect passengers and luggage, causing long delays and concern over passenger privacy. after suspected abuses of the usa patriot act were brought to light in june  with articles about the collection of american call records by the nsa and the prism program , representative jim sensenbrenner, who introduced the patriot act in , said that the nsa overstepped its bounds.criticism of the war on terror has focused on its morality, efficiency, and cost. according to a  study conducted under the auspices of the watson institute for international and public affairs, the several post/ wars participated in by the united states in its war on terror have caused the displacement, conservatively calculated, of  million people in afghanistan, pakistan, iraq, libya, syria, yemen, somalia, and the philippines. the study estimated these wars caused the deaths of , to , people and cost  trillion. the u.s. constitution and u.s. law prohibits the use of torture, yet such human rights violations occurred during the war on terror under the euphemism enhanced interrogation. in , the washington post and human rights watch  published revelations concerning cia flights and black sites, covert prisons operated by the cia. the term torture by proxy is used by some critics to describe situations in which the cia and other u.s. agencies have transferred suspected terrorists to countries known to employ torture.

as all  hijackers died in the attacks, they were never procecuted. osama bin laden, the mastermind of the attacks, was never formally indicted, but was after a year manhunt killed by u.s. special forces on may ,  in his compound in abbottabad, pakistan. to date, only peripheral persons have been convicted for charges in connection with the attacks. these are

zacarias moussaoui who was indicted in december  and sentenced to life in prison without the possibility of parole in may  by a u.s. federal jury

mounir el motassadeq who was first convicted in february  by a federal court of justice in germany and was deported to morocco in october  after serving his sentence

abu dahdah who was arrested in november , sentenced by a spanish high court and released from prison in may .the main trial of the attacks against mohammed and his coconspirators walid bin attash, ramzi bin alshibh, ammar albaluchi, and mustafa ahmad al hawsawi remains unresolved. charges were announced by brigadier general thomas w. hartmann on february ,  at a press conference hosted by the pentagon. in august , it was reported that the biden administration is considering a plea deal that would eliminate the death penalty. khalid sheikh mohammed was arrested on march , , in rawalpindi, pakistan, by pakistani security officials working with the cia. he was then held at multiple cia secret prisons and guantanamo bay, where he was interrogated and tortured with methods including waterboarding. during u.s. hearings at guantanamo bay in march , mohammed again confessed his responsibility for the attacks, stating he was responsible for the / operation from a to z and that his statement was not made under duress. in , mustafa alhawsawi and abd alaziz ali were arrested and transferred to us custody. both would later be accused of providing money and travel assistance to the hijackers.

immediately after the attacks, the federal bureau of investigation started penttbom, the largest criminal inquiry in united states history. at its height, more than half of the fbis agents worked on the investigation and followed a halfmillion leads. the fbi concluded that there was clear and irrefutable evidence linking alqaeda and bin laden to the attacks.

the fbi was quickly able to identify the hijackers, including leader mohamed atta, when his luggage was discovered at bostons logan airport. atta had been forced to check two of his three bags due to space limitations on the seat commuter flight he took to boston. due to a new policy instituted to prevent flight delays, the luggage failed to make it aboard american airlines flight  as planned. the luggage contained the hijackers names, assignments, and alqaeda connections. it had all these arablanguage sic papers that amounted to the rosetta stone of the investigation, said one fbi agent. within hours of the attacks, the fbi released the names and in many cases the personal details of the suspected pilots and hijackers. abu jandal, who served as bin ladens chief bodyguard for years, confirmed the identity of seven hijackers as alqaeda members during interrogations with the fbi on september . he had been jailed in a yemeni prison since . on september , , photos of all  hijackers were released, along with information about possible nationalities and aliases. fifteen of the men were from saudi arabia, two were from the united arab emirates, one was from egypt, and one was from lebanon.by midday, the u.s. national security agency and german intelligence agencies had intercepted communications pointing to osama bin laden. two of the hijackers were known to have traveled with a bin laden associate to malaysia in  and hijacker mohamed atta had previously gone to afghanistan. he and others were part of a terrorist cell in hamburg. one of the members of the hamburg cell in germany was discovered to have been in communication with khalid sheikh mohammed who was identified as a member of alqaeda.authorities in the united states and united kingdom also obtained electronic intercepts, including telephone conversations and electronic bank transfers, which indicated that mohammed atef, a bin laden deputy, was a key figure in the planning of the / attacks. intercepts were also obtained that revealed conversations that took place days before september  between bin laden and an associate in pakistan. in those conversations, the two referred to an incident that would take place in america on, or around, september  and they discussed potential repercussions. in another conversation with an associate in afghanistan, bin laden discussed the scale and effects of a forthcoming operation. these conversations did not specifically mention the world trade center, the pentagon, or other specifics.

in their annual violent crime index for the year of , the fbi recorded the deaths from the attacks as murder, in separate tables so as not to mix them with other reported crime for that year. in a disclaimer, the fbi stated that the number of deaths is so great that combining it with the traditional crime statistics will have an outlier effect that falsely skews all types of measurements in the programs analyses. new york city also did not include the deaths in their annual crime statistics for .

in , john l. helgerson, the inspector general of the central intelligence agency , conducted an internal review of the agencys pre/ performance and was harshly critical of senior cia officials for not doing everything possible to confront terrorism. according to philip giraldi in the american conservative, helgerson criticized their failure to stop two of the / hijackers, nawaf alhazmi and khalid almihdhar, as they entered the united states and their failure to share information on the two men with the fbi.in may , senators from both major u.s. political parties  drafted legislation to make the review public. one of the backers, senator ron wyden said, the american people have a right to know what the central intelligence agency was doing in those critical months before /. the report was released in  by president barack obama.

in february , the senate select committee on intelligence and the house permanent select committee on intelligence formed a joint inquiry into the performance of the u.s. intelligence community. their page report released in december  detailed failings of the fbi and cia to use available information, including about terrorists the cia knew were in the united states, in order to disrupt the plots. the joint inquiry developed its information about possible involvement of saudi arabian government officials from nonclassified sources. nevertheless, the bush administration demanded  related pages remain classified. in december , the inquirys chair bob graham  revealed in an interview that there was evidence that there were foreign governments involved in facilitating the activities of at least some of the terrorists in the united states. september  victim families were frustrated by the unanswered questions and redacted material from the congressional inquiry and demanded an independent commission. september  victim families, members of congress and the saudi arabian government are still seeking release of the documents. in june , cia chief john brennan said that he believes  redacted pages of a congressional inquiry into / will soon be made public, and that they will prove that the government of saudi arabia had no involvement in the september  attacks.in september , the congress passed the justice against sponsors of terrorism act that would allow relatives of victims of the september  attacks to sue saudi arabia for its governments alleged role in the attacks.

the national commission on terrorist attacks upon the united states, popularly known as the / commission, chaired by thomas kean, governor of new jersey from  to , was formed in late  to prepare a thorough account of the circumstances surrounding the attacks, including preparedness for and the immediate response to the attacks. on july , , the commission issued the / commission report, a page report based on its investigations and interviews. thehe report detailed the events leading up to the september  attacks, concluding that they were carried out by alqaeda. the commission also examined how security and intelligence agencies were inadequately coordinated to prevent the attacks.

according to the report, we believe the / attacks revealed four kinds of failures in imagination, policy, capabilities, and management. the commission made numerous recommendations on how to prevent future attacks, and in  was dismayed that several of its recommendations had yet to be implemented.

the u.s. national institute of standards and technology  investigated the collapses of the twin towers and  wtc. the investigations examined why the buildings collapsed and what fire protection measures were in place, and evaluated how fire protection systems might be improved in future construction. the investigation into the collapse of  wtc and  wtc was concluded in october  and that of  wtc was completed in august .nist found that the fireproofing on the twin towers steel infrastructures was blown off by the initial impact of the planes and that had this not occurred, the towers likely would have remained standing. a  study of the north towers collapse published by researchers of purdue university determined that since the planes impact had stripped off much of the structures thermal insulation, the heat from a typical office fire would have softened and weakened the exposed girders and columns enough to initiate the collapse regardless of the number of columns cut or damaged by the impact.the director of the original investigation stated that the towers really did amazingly well. the terrorist aircraft didnt bring the buildings down; it was the fire which followed. it was proven that you could take out twothirds of the columns in a tower and the building would still stand. the fires weakened the trusses supporting the floors, making the floors sag. the sagging floors pulled on the exterior steel columns causing the exterior columns to bow inward.

with the damage to the core columns, the buckling exterior columns could no longer support the buildings, causing them to collapse. additionally, the report found the towers stairwells were not adequately reinforced to provide adequate emergency escape for people above the impact zones. nist concluded that uncontrolled fires in  wtc caused floor beams and girders to heat and subsequently caused a critical support column to fail, initiating a fireinduced progressive collapse that brought the building down.

in july , the obama administration released a document compiled by u.s. investigators dana lesemann and michael jacobson, known as file , which contains a list naming three dozen people, including the suspected saudi intelligence officers attached to saudi arabias embassy in washington, d.c., which connects saudi arabia to the hijackers.in september , congress passed the justice against sponsors of terrorism act. the practical effect of the legislation was to allow the continuation of a longstanding civil lawsuit brought by families of victims of the september  attacks against saudi arabia for its governments alleged role in the attacks. in march , a u.s. judge formally allowed a suit to move forward against the government of saudi arabia brought by / survivors and victims families.in , the families of some / victims obtained two videos and a notepad seized from saudi national omar albayoumi by the british courts. the first video showed him hosting a party in san diego for nawaf alhazmi and khalid almihdhar, the first two hijackers to arrive in the u.s. the other video showed albayoumi greeting the cleric anwar alawlaki, who was blamed for radicalizing americans and later killed in a cia drone strike. the notepad depicted a handdrawn airplane and some mathematical equations that, according to a pilots court statement, might have been used to calculate the rate of descent to get to a target. according to a  fbi memo, from the late s up until the / attack, albayoumi was a paid cooptee of the saudi general intelligence presidency. as of april  he is believed to be living in saudi arabia, which has denied any involvement in /.

on the day of the attacks, new york city mayor rudy giuliani stated we will rebuild. were going to come out of this stronger than before, politically stronger, economically stronger. the skyline will be made whole again.within hours of the attack, a substantial search and rescue operation was launched. after months of aroundtheclock operations, the world trade center site was cleared by the end of may . the damaged section of the pentagon was rebuilt and occupied within a year of the attacks. the temporary world trade center path station opened in late  and construction of the new  world trade center was completed in . work on rebuilding the main world trade center site was delayed until late , when leaseholder larry silverstein and the port authority of new york and new jersey agreed on financing. the construction of one world trade center began on april , , and reached its full height on may , . the spire was installed atop the building at that date, putting one wtcs height at , feet  and thus claiming the title of the tallest building in the western hemisphere. one wtc finished construction and opened on november , .on the world trade center site, three more office towers were to be built one block east of where the original towers stood.  wtc, meanwhile, opened in november , making it the second tower on the site to open behind  world trade center, as well as the first building on the port authority property.  wtc opened on june , , becoming the fourth skyscraper at the site to be completed. in december , the nicholas greek orthodox church fully reopened for regular services followed by the opening of the ronald o. perelman performing arts center in september . with construction beginning in ,  world trade center remains as of november  unfinished. construction of a  world trade center is planned to begin in  and be finished by .christopher o. ward, port authority of new york and new jersey executive director from  to , is a survivor of the attacks and is credited with getting the construction of the / site back on track.

in the days immediately following the attacks, many memorials and vigils were held around the world, and photographs of the dead and missing were posted around ground zero. a witness described being unable to get away from faces of innocent victims who were killed. their pictures are everywhere, on phone booths, street lights, walls of subway stations. everything reminded me of a huge funeral, people quiet and sad, but also very nice. before, new york gave me a cold feeling; now people were reaching out to help each other.

one of the first memorials was the tribute in light, an installation of  searchlights at the footprints of the world trade center towers. in new york city, the world trade center site memorial competition was held to design an appropriate memorial on the site. the winning design, reflecting absence, was selected in august , and consists of a pair of reflecting pools in the footprints of the towers, surrounded by a list of the victims names in an underground memorial space. the memorial was completed on september , ; a museum also opened on site on may , .the sphere by the german sculptor fritz koenig is the worlds largest bronze sculpture of modern times, and stood between the twin towers on the austin j. tobin plaza of the world trade center in new york city from  until the terrorist attacks on september , . the sculpture, weighing more than  tons, was the only remaining work of art to be recovered largely intact from the ruins of the collapsed twin towers after the attacks. since then, the work of art, known in the u.s. as the sphere, has been transformed into an important symbolic monument of / commemoration. after being dismantled and stored near a hangar at john f. kennedy international airport, the sculpture was the subject of the  documentary the sphere by filmmaker percy adlon. on august , , the work was reinstated, installed at the liberty park, close to the new world trade center aerial and the / memorial.in arlington county, the pentagon memorial was completed and opened to the public on the seventh anniversary of the attacks in . it consists of a landscaped park with  benches facing the pentagon. when the pentagon was repaired in , a private chapel and indoor memorial were included, located at the spot where flight  crashed into the building.in shanksville, a concreteandglass visitor center was opened on september , , situated on a hill overlooking the crash site and the white marble wall of names. an observation platform at the visitor center and the white marble wall are both aligned beneath the path of flight . a temporary memorial is located  yards  from the crash site. new york city firefighters donated a cross made of steel from the world trade center and mounted on top of a platform shaped like the pentagon. it was installed outside the firehouse on august , . many other permanent memorials are elsewhere. scholarships and charities have been established by the victims families and by many other organizations and private figures.on every anniversary in new york city, the names of the victims who died there are read out against a background of somber music. the president of the united states attends a memorial service at the pentagon, and asks americans to observe patriot day with a moment of silence. smaller services are held in shanksville, pennsylvania, which are usually attended by the first lady. in september , president joe biden did not attend services in the affected areas, instead marking the day in anchorage, alaska, the first us president to do so since the attacks.

the united states of america , commonly known as the united states  or simply america, is a country primarily located in north america and consisting of  states, a federal district, five major unincorporated territories, and nine minor outlying islands. it includes  indian reservations. it is the worlds thirdlargest country by both land and total area. it shares land borders with canada to its north and with mexico to its south and has maritime borders with the bahamas, cuba, russia, and other nations. with a population of over  million, it is the most populous country in the americas and the thirdmost populous in the world. the national capital of the united states is washington, d.c., and its most populous city and principal financial center is new york city.

indigenous peoples have inhabited the americas for thousands of years. beginning in , british colonization led to the establishment of the thirteen colonies in what is now the eastern united states. they clashed with the british crown over taxation and political representation, which led to the american revolution and the ensuing revolutionary war. the united states declared independence on july , , becoming the first nationstate founded on enlightenment principles of unalienable natural rights, consent of the governed, and liberal democracy. the country began expanding across north america, spanning the continent by . sectional division over slavery led to the secession of the confederate states of america, which fought the remaining states of the union during the american civil war . with the unions victory and preservation, slavery was abolished nationally. however, racial discrimination and inequality continued into subsequent centuries. by , the united states had established itself as a great power, becoming the worlds largest economy. after japans attack on pearl harbor in , the u.s. entered world war ii on the side of the allies. the aftermath of the war left the united states and the soviet union as the worlds two superpowers and led to the cold war, during which both countries engaged in a struggle for ideological dominance and international influence but avoided direct military conflict. during the space race, the united states landed the first humans on the moon, notably with the apollo  mission in . following the soviet unions collapse and the end of the cold war, the united states has emerged as the worlds sole superpower since the s.

the united states government is a federal presidential constitutional republic and liberal democracy with three separate branches of government executive, legislative, and judicial. it has a bicameral national legislature composed of the house of representatives, a lower house based on population; and the senate, an upper house based on equal representation for each state. many policy issues are decentralized at a state or local level, with widely differing laws by jurisdiction which may not conflict with the constitution. the u.s. ranks very highly in international measures of quality of life, income and wealth, economic competitiveness, human rights, innovation, and education; it has low levels of perceived corruption. it has higher levels of incarceration and inequality than most other liberal democracies and is the only liberal democracy without universal healthcare. as a melting pot of cultures and ethnicities, the u.s. has been extensively shaped by the worlds largest immigrant population.

highly developed, the u.s. has by far the largest amount of wealth of any country. the american economy accounts for approximately a quarter of global gdp and is the worlds largest by nominal gdp. the u.s. is the worlds largest importer and secondlargest exporter, as well as the largest consumer market. it is a founding member of the united nations, the world bank, the international monetary fund, the organization of american states, nato and who, and is a permanent member of the united nations security council. it is the worlds foremost political, cultural, economic, military, and scientific power.

the first documentary evidence of the phrase united states of america dates back to a letter from january , , written by stephen moylan, a continental army aide to general george washington, to joseph reed, washingtons aidedecamp. moylan expressed his desire to go with full and ample powers from the united states of america to spain to seek assistance in the revolutionary war effort. the first known publication of the phrase united states of america was in an anonymous essay in the virginia gazette newspaper in williamsburg, on april , .by june , the name united states of america appeared in drafts of the articles of confederation and perpetual union, authored by john dickinson, a founding father from the province of pennsylvania, and in the declaration of independence, written primarily by thomas jefferson and adopted by the second continental congress in philadelphia, on july , .

the first inhabitants of north america migrated from siberia, crossing the bering land bridge and arriving in the presentday united states at least , years ago; some evidence suggests an even earlier date of arrival. the clovis culture, which appeared around ,bc, is believed to represent the first wave of human settlement in the americas. this was likely the first of three major waves of migration into north america; later waves brought the ancestors of presentday athabaskans, aleuts, and eskimos.over time, indigenous cultures in north america grew increasingly sophisticated, and some, such as the precolumbian mississippian culture in the southeast, developed advanced agriculture, architecture, and complex societies. the citystate of cahokia was the largest, most complex precolumbian archaeological site in presentday united states. in the four corners region in presentday southwestern united states, the culture of ancestral puebloans developed over centuries of agricultural experimentation. the algonquian, consisting of peoples who speak algonquian languages, were one of the most populous and widespread north american indigenous peoples. these people were historically prominent along the atlantic coast and in the saint lawrence river and great lakes regions. before european immigrants made contact, most of the algonquian relied on hunting and fishing, and many supplemented their diet by cultivating corn, beans, and squash, known as the three sisters. by european contact in the th century, they practiced slash and burn agriculture, using controlled fire to extend farmlands productivity and manage land. the ojibwe cultivated wild rice. the iroquois confederation haudenosaunee, located in the southern great lakes region, was established between the th and th centuries.estimating the native population of north america before the arrival of european immigrants is difficult. estimates range from over , to nearly  million living near the gulf of mexico, atlantic coast, and mississippi valley.the italian explorer giovanni da verrazzano, sent by france to the new world in , encountered native american inhabitants in the presentday new york bay region. the spanish empire set up their first settlements in florida and new mexico, including in saint augustine , which is often considered the nations oldest city, and santa fe . the french established their own settlements along the mississippi river and gulf of mexico, including in new orleans  and mobile .

british colonization of the east coast of north america began with the virginia colony in , where pilgrims settled in jamestown and later established plymouth colony in . many english settlers were dissenting christians who fled england seeking religious freedom.the continents first elected legislative assembly, the house of burgesses in virginia, was founded in . in , harvard college in cambridge, massachusetts bay colony was founded as the first institution of higher education. the mayflower compact and the fundamental orders of connecticut established precedents for representative selfgovernment and constitutionalism that would develop throughout the american colonies. the native population of america declined after european arrival, primarily as a result of infectious diseases such as smallpox and measles. by the mids, the british defeated and seized the territory of dutch settlers in new netherland, in the midatlantic region.during the th century european colonization many european settlers experienced food shortages, disease, and conflicts with native americans, particularly in king philips war. in addition to conflicts with european settlers, native american polities also warred with each other. but in many cases, the natives and settlers came to develop a mutual dependency. settlers traded for food and animal pelts, and native americans traded for guns, tools, and other european goods. native americans taught many settlers to cultivate corn, beans, and other foodstuffs. european missionaries and others felt it was important to civilize the native americans and urged them to adopt european agricultural practices and lifestyles. with the increased european colonization of north america, however, native americans were often displaced or killed during conflicts.european settlers also began trafficking african slaves into the colonial united states via the transatlantic slave trade. by the turn of the th century, slavery supplanted indentured servitude as the main source of agricultural labor for the cash crops in the southern colonies. colonial society was divided over the religious and moral implications of slavery, and several colonies passed acts for or against it as well as laws designed to keep blacks subservient.in what was then considered british america, the thirteen colonies were administered as overseas dependencies by the british. all colonies had local governments with elections open to white male property owners except jews and, in some areas, catholics. with very high birth rates, low death rates, and steadily growing settlements, the colonial population grew rapidly, eclipsing native american populations. the christian revivalist movement of the s and s, known as the great awakening, fueled colonial interest in both religion and religious liberty. excluding the native americans, the thirteen colonies had a population of over . million in , roughly a third the size of great britain. by the s, despite continuing new immigrant arrivals from britain and other european regions, the natural increase of the population was such that only a small minority of americans had been born overseas. the colonies distance from britain had allowed for the development of selfgovernance in the colonies, but it encountered periodic efforts by british monarchs to reassert royal authority.

after the british victory in the french and indian war that was won largely through the support in men and materiel from the colonies, the british began to assert greater control in local colonial affairs, fomenting colonial political resistance. in , to demonstrate colonial dissatisfaction with the lack of representation in the british government that extracted taxes from them, the first continental congress met in philadelphia and passed the continental association, which mandated a colonieswide boycott of british goods. the british attempted to disarm the americans, resulting in the battles of lexington and concord on april , , igniting the american revolutionary war. the then united colonies responded by again convening in philadelphia as the second continental congress where, in june , they appointed george washington as commanderinchief of the continental army, which was initially composed of various american patriot militias resisting the british army. in june , the second continental congress charged a committee with writing a declaration of independence, largely drafted by thomas jefferson.on july , , the second continental congress with alterations unanimously adopted and issued the declaration of independence, which famously stated we hold these truths to be selfevident, that all men are created equal, that they are endowed by their creator with certain unalienable rights, that among these are life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness. the adoption of the declaration of independence is celebrated annually on july  in the united states as independence day. in , the american victory at the battle of saratoga resulted in the capture of a british army, and led to france and their ally spain joining in the war against them. after the surrender of a second british army at the siege of yorktown in , britain signed a peace treaty. american sovereignty gained international recognition, and the new nation took possession of substantial territory east of the mississippi river, from what is presentday canada in the north to florida in the south. tensions with britain remained, leading to the war of , which was fought to a draw.

in , the articles of confederation and perpetual union established a decentralized government that operated until . considered one of the most important legislative acts of the confederation congress, northwest ordinance  established the precedent by which the national government would be sovereign and expand westward with the admission of new states, rather than with the expansion of existing states and their established sovereignty under the articles. the prohibition of slavery in the territory had the practical effect of establishing the ohio river as the geographic divide between slave states and free states from the appalachian mountains to the mississippi river, an extension of the masondixon line. it also helped set the stage for later federal political conflicts over slavery during the th century until the american civil war.as it became increasingly apparent that the confederation was insufficient to govern the new country, nationalists advocated for and led the philadelphia convention of , where the united states constitution was authored and then ratified in state conventions in . the u.s. constitution is the oldest and longeststanding written and codified national constitution in force today. going into effect in , it reorganized the government into a federation administered by three branches , on the principle of creating salutary checks and balances. george washington, who led the continental army to victory in the revolutionary war and then willingly relinquished power, was elected the new nations first president under the new constitution. the bill of rights was adopted in , originally forbidding only federal restriction of personal freedoms and guaranteeing a range of legal protections, portions of the bill of rights are now applied to state and local governments by virtue of both state and federal court decisions.

 during the colonial period, slavery was legal in the american colonies, and challenges to its moral legitimacy were rare. however, during the american revolution, many began to question the practice. regional divisions over slavery grew in the ensuing decades, with prominent founding fathers in the northern united states advocating for the abolition of slavery. by the s, slavery had been abolished in all northern states. despite the federal government outlawing american participation in the atlantic slave trade in , the exponential increase in profits for southern elites resulting from the drastic reduction of cotton production costs after the invention of the cotton gin, spurred entrenchment and support of slavery in the southern united states.in the late th century, american settlers began to expand further westward, some of them with a sense of manifest destiny.the louisiana purchase  nearly doubled the acreage of the united states, effectively ending french colonial interest in north america and their opposition to american westward expansion. spain ceded florida and other gulf coast territory in , the second great awakening, especially in the period , converted millions to evangelical protestantism. in the north, it energized multiple social reform movements, including abolitionism; in the south, methodists and baptists proselytized among slave populations. in , the missouri compromise admitted missouri as a slave state and maine as a free state, and instituted a policy of prohibiting slavery in the remaining louisiana purchase lands north of the  parallel. the outcome de facto sectionalized the country into two factions free states, which forbade slavery; and slave states, which protected the institution; it was controversial and widely seen as dividing the country along sectarian lines. as americans expanded further into land inhabited by native americans, the federal government often applied policies of indian removal or assimilation. the displacement prompted a long series of american indian wars west of the mississippi river and eventually conflict with mexico. most of these conflicts ended with the cession of native american territory and their confinement to indian reservations. the republic of texas was annexed in  during a period of expansionism, and the  oregon treaty with britain led to u.s. control of the presentday american northwest. victory in the mexicanamerican war resulted in the  mexican cession of california and much of the presentday american southwest, resulting in the u.s. spanning the continent from the atlantic to the pacific oceans.

sectional conflict regarding african slavery was the primary cause of the american civil war. with the  election of abraham lincoln, conventions in eleven slave states in the southern u.s. declared secession and formed the confederate states of america, while the remaining states, known as the union, maintained that secession was unconstitutional and illegitimate. on april , , the confederacy initiated military conflict by bombarding fort sumter, a federal garrison in charleston harbor in south carolina. the ensuing american civil war fought between  and  became the deadliest military conflict in american history. the war resulted in the deaths of approximately , soldiers from both sides and upwards of , civilians, most of them in the south. in early july , the civil war began to turn in the unions favor following the union army under general ulysses s. grant successfully splitting the confederacy in two by capturing vicksburg in the west, denying it any further movement along or across the mississippi river and preventing supplies from texas and arkansas that might sustain the war effort from passing east, almost simultaneous with victory in the battle of gettysburg, where union army general george meade halted confederate army general robert e. lees invasion of the north. in april , following the union armys victory at the battle of appomattox court house, the confederacy surrendered and soon collapsed.reconstruction began in earnest following the defeat of the confederates. while president lincoln attempted to foster reconciliation between the union and former confederacy, his assassination on april ,  drove a wedge between north and south again. radical republicans in the federal government made it their goal to oversee the rebuilding of the south and to ensure the rights of african americans, and the socalled reconstruction amendments to the constitution guaranteed the abolishment of slavery, full citizenship to americans of african descent, and suffrage for adult black men. they persisted until the compromise of .to encourage additional westward settlement the homestead acts were several laws in the united states by which an applicant could acquire ownership of government land or the public domain, typically called a homestead. in all, more than  million acres  of public land, or nearly  percent of the total area of the united states, was given away free to . million homesteaders; most of the homesteads were west of the mississippi river. the southern homestead act of  was enacted specifically to break a cycle of debt during reconstruction. prior to this act, blacks and impoverished whites alike were having trouble buying land or did not have the means to travel west. sharecropping and tenant farming had become ways of life. this act attempted to solve this by selling land at low prices so marginalized southerners could buy it. many, however, could still not participate because the low prices remained out of reach.

influential southern whites, calling themselves redeemers, took local control of the south after the end of reconstruction, leading to the nadir of american race relations. from  to , the redeemers established socalled jim crow laws, disenfranchising almost all blacks and some impoverished whites throughout the region. blacks faced racial segregation nationwide and codified discrimination, especially in the south, and lived under the threat of lynching and other vigilante violence.national infrastructure, including telegraph and transcontinental railroads, spurred economic growth and greater settlement and development of the american old west. after the end of the american civil war in , new transcontinental railways made relocation easier for settlers, expanded internal trade, and increased conflicts with native americans. mainland expansion also included the purchase of alaska from russia in . in , proamerican elements in hawaii overthrew the hawaiian monarchy and formed the republic of hawaii, which the u.s. annexed in . puerto rico, guam, and the philippines were ceded by spain in the same year, by the treaty of paris  following the spanishamerican war. puerto ricans did not gain citizenship either through the foraker act  or the insular cases , but through the jonesshafroth act in , allowing for the conscription of , puerto ricans, which began two months later. american samoa was acquired by the united states in  after the end of the second samoan civil war. the u.s. virgin islands were purchased from denmark in .

from  through  an unprecedented and diverse stream of immigrants arrived in the united states, . million in total. of those, . million  came from europe, including from great britain, ireland, scandinavia, germany, italy, russia and other parts of central and eastern europe. another . million came from canada. most came through the port of new york city, and from  specifically through the now iconic immigration station on ellis island there, but some ethnic groups tended to congregate in specific locations. new york and other large cities of the east coast became home to large jewish, irish, and italian populations, while many germans and central europeans moved to the midwest, obtaining jobs in industry and mining. at the same time, about one million french canadians migrated from quebec to new england. the great migration, which began around , resulted in millions of african americans leaving the rural south for urban areas in the north.rapid economic development during the late th and early th centuries fostered the rise of many prominent industrialists, largely by their formation of trusts and monoplies to prevent competition. tycoons like cornelius vanderbilt, john d. rockefeller, and andrew carnegie led the nations expansion in the railroad, petroleum, and steel industries. banking became a major part of the economy, with j. p. morgan playing a notable role. the united states also emerged as a pioneer of the automotive industry in the early th century. these changes were accompanied by significant increases in economic inequality, slum conditions, and social unrest, which prompted the rise of populist, socialist, and anarchist movements. this period eventually ended with the advent of the progressive era, which was characterized by significant reforms, including health and safety regulation of consumer goods, the rise of labor unions, greater antitrust measures to ensure competition among businesses, and improvements in worker conditions.

the united states remained neutral after the outbreak of world war i in  until  when it joined the war as an associated power alongside the allies of world war i, helping to turn the tide against the central powers, and played a leading role in the paris peace conference. in , a constitutional amendment granted nationwide womens suffrage. during the s and s, radio for mass communication and ultimately the invention of early television transformed communications in the united states. the prosperity of the roaring twenties ended with the wall street crash of  and the onset of the great depression. after his election as president in , franklin d. roosevelt, between  and , introduced his new deal social and economic policies, which included public works projects, financial reforms, and regulations which represented a shift to a new current of modern liberalism in the united states. the dust bowl of the mids impoverished many farming communities and spurred a new wave of western migration.at first neutral during world war ii, the u.s. began supplying war materiel to the allies of world war ii in march . on december , , the empire of japan launched a surprise attack on pearl harbor, causing the u.s. to militarily join the allies against the axis powers. the u.s. pursued a europe first defense policy, and the philippines was invaded and occupied by japan until its liberation by u.s. led forces in . the u.s. developed the first nuclear weapons and used them againast the japanese cities of hiroshima and nagasaki in august ; the subsequent surrender of japan on september  ended world war ii. the united states was one of the four policemen who met to plan the postwar world, alongside the united kingdom, soviet union, and china. it played a leading role in the bretton woods and yalta conferences, and participated in a  international conference that produced the united nations charter, which became active after the wars end. the u.s. emerged relatively unscathed from the war, with even greater economic and military influence.

after world war ii, the united states launched the marshall plan to aid in the reconstruction of europe. this period also marked the beginning of the cold war, where geopolitical tensions between the u.s. and the soviet union driven by ideological differences and competition for international influence led the two countries to dominate the affairs of europe, with the u.s.led capitalist western bloc opposing the sovietled communist eastern bloc. the u.s. engaged in regime change against governments perceived to be aligned with the soviet union, participated in conflicts like the korean and vietnam wars, and competed in the space race, culminating in the first crewed moon landing in . domestically, the u.s. experienced large economic growth, urbanization, and population growth following world war ii, and admitted alaska and hawaii as states.

the civil rights movement emerged, with martin luther king jr. becoming a prominent leader in the early s. president lyndon b. johnson initiated the great society, introducing sweeping legislation and policies to address poverty and racial inequalities, the voting rights act and the civil rights act most prominent among them. the counterculture movement in the u.s. brought significant social changes, including the liberalization of attitudes towards what substances are acceptable for recreational drug use, sexuality and the beginning of the modern gay rights movement as well as open defiance of the military draft and opposition to intervention in vietnam.the presidency of richard nixon saw the american withdrawal from vietnam but also the watergate scandal, which led to his resignation and a decline in public trust of government that expanded for decades. after a surge in female labor participation around the s, by , the majority of women aged  and over were employed. the s and early s saw economic stagflation and president ronald reagan responded with neoliberal reforms and a rollback strategy towards the soviet union. the late s and early s saw the collapse of the warsaw pact and the dissolution of the soviet union, which marked the end of the cold war and solidified the u.s. as the worlds sole superpower.

in the first decades of the st century, the u.s. faced challenges from terrorism, with the september  attacks in  leading to the war on terror and military interventions in afghanistan and iraq. the u.s. housing bubble in  culminated in the  financial crisis and the great recession, the largest economic contraction since the great depression. amid the financial crisis, barack obama, the first multiracial president, was elected in .political polarization increased as sociopolitical debates on cultural issues dominated political discussion. the covid pandemic resulted in over  million confirmed cases and  million deaths, making it the most deadly pandemic in u.s. history. attempts to overturn the  u.s. presidential election culminated in the january ,  attack on the united states capitol that attempted to prevent the peaceful transition of power to presidentelect joe biden.

the  contiguous states and the district of columbia occupy a combined area of ,, square miles . of this area, ,, square miles  is contiguous land, composing . of total u.s. land area. about  is occupied by alaska, a state in northwestern north america, with the remainder in hawaii, a state and archipelago in the central pacific, and the five populated but unincorporated insular territories of puerto rico, american samoa, guam, the northern mariana islands, and the u.s. virgin islands. measured by only land area, the united states is third in size behind russia and china, and just ahead of canada. the united states is the worlds thirdlargest nation by land and total area behind russia and canada.the coastal plain of the atlantic seaboard gives way further inland to deciduous forests and the rolling hills of the piedmont. the appalachian mountains and the adirondack massif divide the eastern seaboard from the great lakes and the grasslands of the midwest. the mississippimissouri river, the worlds fourth longest river system, runs mainly northsouth through the heart of the country. the flat, fertile prairie of the great plains stretches to the west, interrupted by a highland region in the southeast.the rocky mountains, west of the great plains, extend north to south across the country, peaking at over , feet  in colorado. farther west are the rocky great basin and deserts such as the chihuahua, sonoran, and mojave. the sierra nevada and cascade mountain ranges run close to the pacific coast, both ranges also reaching altitudes higher than , feet . the lowest and highest points in the contiguous united states are in the state of california, and only about  miles  apart. at an elevation of , feet , alaskas denali is the highest peak in the country and in north america. active volcanoes are common throughout alaskas alexander and aleutian islands, and hawaii consists of volcanic islands. the supervolcano underlying yellowstone national park in the rockies is the continents largest volcanic feature.

with its large size and geographic variety, the united states includes most climate types. to the east of the th meridian, the climate ranges from humid continental in the north to humid subtropical in the south.the great plains west of the th meridian are semiarid. many mountainous areas of the american west have an alpine climate. the climate is arid in the great basin, desert in the southwest, mediterranean in coastal california, and oceanic in coastal oregon and washington and southern alaska. most of alaska is subarctic or polar. hawaii and the southern tip of florida are tropical, as well as its territories in the caribbean and the pacific.states bordering the gulf of mexico are prone to hurricanes, and most of the worlds tornadoes occur in the country, mainly in tornado alley areas in the midwest and south. overall, the united states receives more highimpact extreme weather incidents than any other country in the world.extreme weather became more frequent in the u.s. in the st century, with three times the number of reported heat waves as in the s. of the ten warmest years ever recorded in the  contiguous states, eight occurred after . in the american southwest, droughts became more persistent and more severe.

the u.s. is one of  megadiverse countries containing large numbers of endemic species about , species of vascular plants occur in the contiguous united states and alaska, and more than  species of flowering plants are found in hawaii, few of which occur on the mainland. the united states is home to  mammal species,  birds,  reptiles, and  amphibians, and , insect species.there are  national parks, and hundreds of other federally managed parks, forests, and wilderness areas, managed by the national park service and other agencies. altogether, about  of the countrys land area is publicly owned and federally managed, primarily located in the western states. most of this land is protected, though some is leased for oil and gas drilling, mining, logging, or cattle ranching, and less than one percent of it is used for military purposes.environmental issues in the united states include debates on nonrenewable resources and nuclear energy, air and water pollution, biological diversity, logging and deforestation, and climate change. the u.s. environmental protection agency , created by presidential order in , is the federal agency charged with enforcing and addressing most environmentalrelated issues. the idea of wilderness has shaped the management of public lands since , with the wilderness act. the endangered species act of  is intended to protect threatened and endangered species and their habitats, which are monitored by the united states fish and wildlife service.as of , the u.s. ranked th among  nations in the environmental performance index. the country joined the paris agreement on climate change in , and has many other environmental commitments. it withdrew from the paris agreement in  but rejoined it in .

the united states was founded on the principles of the american enlightenment. it is a federal republic of  states, a federal district, five territories and several uninhabited island possessions. it is the worlds oldest surviving federation, and, according to the world economic forum, the oldest democracy as well. it is a liberal representative democracy in which majority rule is tempered by minority rights protected by law.the u.s. constitution serves as the countrys supreme legal document, establishing the structure and responsibilities of the federal government and its relationship with the individual states. the constitution has been amended  times.the federal government comprises three branches, which are headquartered in washington, d.c. and regulated by a system of checks and balances defined by the constitution.

the u.s. congress, a bicameral legislature, made up of the senate and the house of representatives, makes federal law, declares war, approves treaties, has the power of the purse, and has the power of impeachment, by which it can remove the president, vice president, and presidentiallyappointed civil officers of the united states. each chamber determines the method of trial and punishment for its own members, and may expel a member with a twothirds majority the senate has  members, elected for a sixyear term in dualseat constituencies , with onethird being renewed every two years. the house of representatives has  members, elected for a twoyear term in singleseat constituencies of approximately equal population, and elections occur every two years, correlated with presidential elections or halfway through a presidents term.

the u.s. president is the commanderinchief of the military, can veto legislative bills before they become law , and appoints the members of the cabinet  and other officers, who administer and enforce federal laws and policies through their respective agencies. the president and the vice president are elected together in a presidential election. it is an indirect election, with the winner being determined by votes cast by electors of the electoral college. in modern times, voters in each state select a slate of electors from a list of several slates designated by different parties or candidates, and the electors typically promise in advance to vote for the candidates of their party . the winner of the election is the candidate with at least  electoral college votes. the president and vice president serve a fouryear term and may be elected to the office no more than twice.

the u.s. federal judiciary, whose judges are all appointed for life by the president with senate approval, consists primarily of the u.s. supreme court, the u.s. courts of appeals, and the u.s. district courts. the u.s. supreme court interprets laws and overturn those they find unconstitutional. the supreme court is led by the chief justice of the united states. it has nine members who serve for life. the members are appointed by the sitting president when a vacancy becomes available. federal judges, like supreme court justices, are appointed by the president with the consent of the senate to serve until they resign, are impeached and convicted, retire, or are deceased.throughout its history, the united states has been a twoparty system where both parties adhere to differing interpretations of liberalism. the republican party adheres to a form of classical liberalism known as american conservatism; the democratic party adheres to social liberalism, which is often simply termed liberalism in the modern day.

in the american federal system, sovereignty is shared between two levels of government federal and state. each of the  states has territory where it shares sovereignty with the federal government. people in the states are also represented by local elected governments, which are administrative divisions of the states. states are subdivided into counties or county equivalents, and further divided into municipalities. the district of columbia is a federal district that contains the capital of the united states, the city of washington. the territories and the district of columbia are administrative divisions of the federal government. governance on many issues is decentralized.

the united states has an established structure of foreign relations, and it had the worlds secondlargest diplomatic corps in . it is a permanent member of the united nations security council, and home to the united nations headquarters. the united states is also a member of the g, g, and oecd intergovernmental organizations. almost all countries have embassies and many have consulates  in the country. likewise, nearly all nations host formal diplomatic missions with the united states, except iran, north korea, and bhutan. though taiwan does not have formal diplomatic relations with the u.s., it maintains close unofficial relations. the united states also regularly supplies taiwan with military equipment to deter potential chinese aggression.the united states has a special relationship with the united kingdom and strong ties with canada, australia, new zealand, the philippines, japan, south korea, israel, and several european union countries . the u.s. works closely with its  nato allies on military and national security issues, and with nations in the americas through the organization of american states and the united statesmexicocanada free trade agreement. in south america, colombia is traditionally considered to be the closest ally of the united states. the u.s. exercises full international defense authority and responsibility for micronesia, the marshall islands, and palau through the compact of free association. it has increasingly conducted strategic cooperation with india, and its ties with china have steadily deteriorated. since , the u.s. has become a key ally of ukraine.

the president is the commanderinchief of the united states armed forces and appoints its leaders, the secretary of defense and the joint chiefs of staff. the department of defense, which is headquartered at the pentagon near washington, d.c., administers five of the six service branches, which are made up of the army, marine corps, navy, air force, and space force. the coast guard is administered by the department of homeland security in peacetime and can be transferred to the department of the navy in wartime.the united states spent  billion on its military in , which is by far the largest amount of any country, making up  of global military spending and accounting for . of the countrys gdp. the u.s. has more than  of the worlds nuclear weapons, the secondlargest amount after russia.the united states has the thirdlargest combined armed forces in the world, behind the chinese peoples liberation army and indian armed forces. the military operates about  bases and facilities abroad, and maintains deployments greater than  active duty personnel in  foreign countries.today, american forces can be rapidly deployed by the air forces large fleet of transport aircraft, the navys  active aircraft carriers, and marine expeditionary units at sea with the navy, and armys xviii airborne corps and th ranger regiment deployed by air force transport aircraft. the air force can strike targets across the globe through its fleet of strategic bombers, maintains the air defense across the united states, and provides close air support to army and marine corps ground forces.

there are about , u.s. police agencies from local to federal level in the united states. law in the united states is mainly enforced by local police departments and sheriff departments in their municipal or county jurisdictions. the state police departments have authority in their respective state, and federal agencies such as the federal bureau of investigation  and the u.s. marshals service have national jurisdiction and specialized duties, such as protecting civil rights, national security and enforcing u.s. federal courts rulings and federal laws. state courts conduct most civil and criminal trials, and federal courts handle designated crimes and appeals of state court decisions.as of , the united states has an intentional homicide rate of  per , people. a crosssectional analysis of the world health organization mortality database from  showed that united states homicide rates were . times higher than in other highincome countries, driven by a gun homicide rate that was . times higher.as of january , the united states has the sixth highest percapita incarceration rate in the world, at  people per ,; and the largest prison and jail population in the world at . in , the total prison population for those sentenced to more than a year was ,,, corresponding to a ratio of  per , residents and the lowest since . some think tanks place that number higher, such as prison policy initiatives estimate of . million. various states have attempted to reduce their prison populations via government policies and grassroots initiatives.

according to the international monetary fund, the u.s. gross domestic product  is . trillion, the largest of any country in the world, constituting over  of the gross world product at market exchange rates and over  of the gross world product at purchasing power parity . from  to , u.s. real compounded annual gdp growth was ., compared to a . weighted average for the rest of the group of seven. the country ranks first in the world by disposable income per capita, nominal gdp, second by gdp , seventh by nominal gdp per capita, and eighth by gdp  per capita.the u.s. has been the worlds largest economy since at least . anchored by wall street in lower manhattan, the u.s. is the worlds leading financial and fintech center. many of the worlds largest companies, such as alphabet , amazon, apple, att, cocacola, disney, general motors, mcdonalds, meta, microsoft, nike, pepsi, and walmart, were founded and are headquartered in the united states. of the worlds  largest companies,  are headquartered in the u.s. the u.s. dollar is the currency most used in international transactions and is the worlds foremost reserve currency, backed by the countrys dominant economy, its military, the petrodollar system, and its linked eurodollar and large u.s. treasuries market. several countries use it as their official currency and in others it is the de facto currency. it has free trade agreements with several countries, including the usmca. the u.s. ranked second in the global competitiveness report in , after singapore.new york city is the worlds principal financial center, with the largest economic output, and the epicenter of the principal american metropolitan economy. the new york stock exchange and nasdaq, both located in new york city, are the worlds two largest stock exchanges by market capitalization and trade volume. the united states is at or near the forefront of technological advancement and innovation in many economic fields, especially in artificial intelligence; computers; pharmaceuticals; and medical, aerospace and military equipment. the nations economy is fueled by abundant natural resources, a welldeveloped infrastructure, and high productivity. it has the secondhighest totalestimated value of natural resources. the largest u.s. trading partners are the european union, mexico, canada, china, japan, south korea, the united kingdom, vietnam, india, and taiwan. the united states is the worlds largest importer and the secondlargest exporter after china. it is by far the worlds largest exporter of services.while its economy has reached a postindustrial level of development, the united states remains an industrial power. as of , the u.s. is the secondlargest manufacturing nation after china. in , the u.s. was both the worlds largest exporter and importer of engines. despite the fact that the u.s. only accounted for . of the global population, residents of the u.s. collectively possessed . of the worlds total wealth as of , the largest percentage of any country. the u.s. also ranks first in the number of dollar billionaires and millionaires, with  billionaires and nearly  million millionaires .americans have the highest average household and employee income among oecd member states, and the fourthhighest median household income, up from sixthhighest in . wealth in the united states is highly concentrated; the richest  of the adult population own  of the countrys household wealth, while the bottom  own just . income inequality in the u.s. remains at record highs, with the top fifth of earners taking home more than half of all income and giving the u.s. one of the widest income distributions among oecd members. there were about , sheltered and unsheltered homeless persons in the u.s. in , with  staying in an emergency shelter or transitional housing program. in  six million children experience food insecurity. feeding america estimates that around one in seven, or approximately  million, children experience hunger and do not know where they will get their next meal or when. as of june ,  million people, roughly . of the u.s. population, were living in poverty, including . million children.the united states has a smaller welfare state and redistributes less income through government action than most other highincome countries. it is the only advanced economy that does not guarantee its workers paid vacation nationally and is one of a few countries in the world without federal paid family leave as a legal right. the united states also has a higher percentage of lowincome workers than almost any other developed nation, largely because of a weak collective bargaining system and lack of government support for atrisk workers.

the united states has been a leader in technological innovation since the late th century and scientific research since the midth century. methods for producing interchangeable parts and the establishment of a machine tool industry enabled the u.s. to have largescale manufacturing of sewing machines, bicycles, and other items in the late th century. in the early th century, factory electrification, the introduction of the assembly line, and other laborsaving techniques created the system of mass production. in the st century, approximately twothirds of research and development funding comes from the private sector. in , the united states was the country with the secondhighest number of published scientific papers. as of , the u.s. ranked second by the number of patent applications, and third by trademark and industrial design applications. the u.s. had , active satellites in space in december , the highest number of any country. in , the united states ranked rd in the global innovation index.as of , the united states receives approximately . of its energy from fossil fuels. in , the largest source of the countrys energy came from petroleum , followed by natural gas , coal , renewable sources , and nuclear power . the united states constitutes less than  of the worlds population, but consumes  of the worlds energy. it accounts  for about   of both the worlds annual petroleum consumption and petroleum supply. the u.s. ranks as secondhighest emitter of greenhouse gases, exceeded only by china.

the united statess rail network, nearly all standard gauge, is the longest in the world, and exceeds , km . it handles mostly freight, with intercity passenger service primarily provided by amtrak, a governmentmanaged company that took over services previously run by private companies, to all but four states.personal transportation in the united states is dominated by automobiles, which operate on a network of  million miles  of public roads, making it the longest network in the world. the oldsmobile curved dash and the ford model t, both american cars, are considered the first massproduced and massaffordable cars, respectively. as of , the united states is the secondlargest manufacturer of motor vehicles and is home to tesla, the worlds most valuable car company. american automotive company general motors held the title of the worlds bestselling automaker from  to . currently, the american automotive industry is the worlds secondlargest automobile market by sales, and the u.s. has the highest vehicle ownership per capita in the world, with . vehicles per  americans . in , there were  million nontwo wheel motor vehicles, or about  vehicles per  people.the american civil airline industry is entirely privately owned and has been largely deregulated since , while most major airports are publicly owned. the three largest airlines in the world by passengers carried are u.s.based; american airlines is number one after its  acquisition by us airways. of the worlds  busiest passenger airports,  are in the united states, including the top five and the busiest, hartsfieldjackson atlanta international airport. as of , there are , airports in the united states, of which , are designated as public use, including for general aviation and other activities.of the fifty busiest container ports, four are located in the united states, of which the busiest is the port of los angeles. the countrys inland waterways are the worlds fifthlongest, and total , km .

the u.s. census bureau reported ,, residents as of april , , making the united states the thirdmost populous nation in the world, after china and india. according to the bureaus u.s. population clock, on january , , the u.s. population had a net gain of one person every  seconds, or about  people per day. in ,  of americans age  and over were married,  were widowed,  were divorced, and  had never been married. in , the total fertility rate for the u.s. stood at . children per woman, and it had the worlds highest rate of children  living in singleparent households in .the united states has a diverse population;  ancestry groups have more than one million members. white americans with ancestry from europe, the middle east or north africa, form the largest racial and ethnic group at . of the united states population. hispanic and latino americans form the secondlargest group and are . of the united states population. african americans constitute the nations thirdlargest ancestry group and are . of the total united states population. asian americans are the countrys fourthlargest group, composing . of the united states population, while the countrys . million native americans account for about . in , the median age of the united states population was . years.

while many languages are spoken in the united states, english is overwhelmingly the most commonly spoken in a majority of the country. although there is no official language at the federal level, some lawssuch as u.s. naturalization requirementsstandardize english, and most states have declared english as the official language. three states and four u.s. territories have recognized local or indigenous languages in addition to english, including hawaii , alaska , south dakota , american samoa , puerto rico , guam , and the northern mariana islands . in puerto rico, spanish is more widely spoken than english.according to the american community survey, in  some  million people  spoke only english at home. more than  million spoke spanish at home, making it the second most commonly used language. other languages spoken at home by one million people or more include chinese , tagalog , vietnamese , french , korean , and german .

the first amendment guarantees the free exercise of religion and forbids congress from passing laws respecting its establishment. religious practice is widespread, among the most diverse in the world, and vibrant, with the country being far more religious than other wealthy western nations. an overwhelming majority of americans believe in a higher power, engage in spiritual practices such as prayer, and consider themselves religious or spiritual. the country has the worlds largest christian population. a majority of the global jewish population lives in the united states, as measured by the law of return.a  gallup poll found that  reported attending a church, synagogue, mosque or temple weekly or nearly weekly. religious practice varies significantly by region. in the bible belt, located within the southern united states, evangelical protestantism plays a significant role culturally. new england and the western united states tend to be less religious, although mormonisma restorationist christian movement started in new york in the th centuryis the predominant religious affiliation in utah. around  of americans claim a nonchristian faith. the largest of which are judaism, islam, hinduism, and buddhism. ceremonial deism is common in american culture. religious belief and interest has remained relatively stable in recent years; organizational participation, in contrast, has decreased.other notable faiths include buddhism, hinduism, islam, many new age movements, and a large variety of native american religions.

americas immigrant population, numbering more than  million, is by far the worlds largest in absolute terms. in , there were . million immigrants and u.s.born children of immigrants in the united states, accounting for nearly  of the overall u.s. population. in , out of the u.s. foreignborn population, some   were naturalized citizens,   were lawful permanent residents,   were temporary lawful residents, and   were unauthorized immigrants. in , the top countries of origin for immigrants were mexico , india , china , the philippines , and el salvador . the united states has led the world in refugee resettlement for decades, admitting more refugees than the rest of the world combined.

about  of americans live in urban areas, including suburbs; about half of those reside in cities with populations over ,. in ,  incorporated municipalities had populations over ,, nine cities had more than one million residents, and four cities  had populations exceeding two million. many u.s. metropolitan populations are growing rapidly, particularly in the south and west.

american public education is operated by state and local governments and regulated by the united states department of education through restrictions on federal grants. in most states, children are required to attend school from the age of five or six  until they turn  ; some states allow students to leave school at  or . of americans  and older, . graduated from high school, . attended some college, . earned a bachelors degree, and . earned graduate degrees. the basic literacy rate is nearuniversal. the country has the most nobel prize winners in history, with  .the united states has many private and public institutions of higher education including many of the worlds top universities, as listed by various ranking organizations, are in the united states, including  of the top . there are local community colleges with generally more open admission policies, shorter academic programs, and lower tuition. the u.s. spends more on education per student than any nation in the world, spending an average of , per year on public elementary and secondary school students in the  school year.as for public expenditures on higher education, the u.s. spends more per student than the oecd average, and more than all nations in combined public and private spending. despite some student loan forgiveness programs in place, student loan debt has increased by  in the last decade, and exceeded . trillion dollars as of .

in a preliminary report, the centers for disease control and prevention  announced that u.s. life expectancy at birth was . years in  , down . years from . the chief causes listed were the covid pandemic, accidents, drug overdoses, heart and liver disease, and suicides. life expectancy was highest among asians and hispanics and lowest among blacks and american indianalaskan native  peoples. starting in , the life expectancy in the u.s. fell behind that of other wealthy industrialized countries, and americans health disadvantage gap has been increasing ever since. the u.s. also has one of the highest suicide rates among highincome countries. approximately onethird of the u.s. adult population is obese and another third is overweight. poverty is the th leading risk factor for premature death in the united states annually, according to a  study published in jama.the u.s. healthcare system far outspends that of any other nation, measured both in per capita spending and as a percentage of gdp, but attains worse healthcare outcomes when compared to peer nations. the united states is the only developed nation without a system of universal healthcare, and a significant proportion of the population that does not carry health insurance.governmentfunded healthcare coverage for the poor  and for those age  and older  is available to americans who meet the programs income or age qualifications. in , former president obama passed the patient protection and affordable care act or aca, with the law roughly halving the uninsured share of the population according to the cdc. its legacy remains controversial.

americans have traditionally been characterized by a unifying political belief in an american creed emphasizing liberty, equality under the law, democracy, social equality, property rights, and a preference for limited government. culturally, the country has been described as having the values of individualism and personal autonomy, having a strong work ethic, competitiveness, and voluntary altruism towards others. according to a  study by the charities aid foundation, americans donated . of total gdp to charity, the highest in the world by a large margin. part of both the anglosphere and western world, the united states is also home to a wide variety of ethnic groups, traditions, and values, and exerts major cultural influence on a global scale, with the phenomenon being termed americanization. as such, the u.s. is considered a cultural superpower.nearly all present americans or their ancestors came from eurafrasia  within the past five centuries. mainstream american culture is a western culture largely derived from the traditions of european immigrants with influences from many other sources, such as traditions brought by slaves from africa. more recent immigration from asia and especially latin america has added to a cultural mix that has been described as a homogenizing melting pot, and a heterogeneous salad bowl, with immigrants contributing to, and often assimilating into, mainstream american culture. the american dream, or the perception that americans enjoy high social mobility, plays a key role in attracting immigrants. whether this perception is accurate has been a topic of debate. while mainstream culture holds that the united states is a classless society, scholars identify significant differences between the countrys social classes, affecting socialization, language, and values. americans tend to greatly value socioeconomic achievement, but being ordinary or average is promoted by some as a noble condition as well.the united states is considered to have the strongest protections of free speech of any country under the first amendment, which protects flag desecration, hate speech, blasphemy, and lesemajesty as forms of protected expression. a  pew research center poll found that americans were the most supportive of free expression of any polity measured. they are also the most supportive of freedom of the press and the right to use the internet without government censorship. it is a socially progressive country with permissive attitudes surrounding human sexuality. lgbt rights in the united states are among the most advanced in the world.

the four major broadcasters in the u.s. are the national broadcasting company , columbia broadcasting system , american broadcasting company , and fox broadcasting company . the four major broadcast television networks are all commercial entities. cable television offers hundreds of channels catering to a variety of niches. as of , about  of americans over age  listen to broadcast radio, while about  listen to podcasts. as of september , , there are , licensed fullpower radio stations in the u.s. according to the u.s. federal communications commission . much of the public radio broadcasting is supplied by npr, incorporated in february  under the public broadcasting act of .globallyrecognized newspapers in the united states include the wall street journal, the new york times, the washington post, and usa today. more than  publications are produced in spanish, the second most commonly used language in the united states behind english. with very few exceptions, all the newspapers in the u.s. are privately owned, either by large chains such as gannett or mcclatchy, which own dozens or even hundreds of newspapers; by small chains that own a handful of papers; or, in a situation that is increasingly rare, by individuals or families. major cities often have alternative newspapers to complement the mainstream daily papers, such as the village voice in new york city and la weekly in los angeles. the five most popular websites used in the u.s. are google, youtube, amazon, yahoo, and facebook, with all of them being american companies.as of , the video game market of the united states is the worlds largest by revenue. major video game publishers and developers headquartered in the united states are sony interactive entertainment, taketwo, activision blizzard, electronic arts, xbox game studios, bethesda softworks, epic games, valve, warner bros., riot games, and others. there are  publishers, developers, and hardware companies in california alone.

in the th and early th centuries, american art and literature took most of their cues from europe. writers such as washington irving, nathaniel hawthorne, edgar allan poe, and henry david thoreau established a distinctive american literary voice by the middle of the th century. mark twain and poet walt whitman were major figures in the centurys second half; emily dickinson, virtually unknown during her lifetime, is recognized as an essential american poet.almost until the th century pervasive antiliteracy laws prevented most people of color from learning to read or write. in the s, the new negro movement coalesced in harlem, where many writers had migrated from the southern united states and west indies. its panafrican perspective was a significant cultural export during the jazz age in paris and as such was a key early influence on the ngritude philosophy.since its first use in the th century, the term great american novel has been applied to many books, including herman melvilles mobydick , harriet beecher stowes uncle toms cabin , twains the adventures of huckleberry finn , f. scott fitzgeralds the great gatsby , john steinbecks the grapes of wrath , harper lees to kill a mockingbird , toni morrisons beloved , and david foster wallaces infinite jest .thirteen u.s. citizens have won the nobel prize in literature, most recently louise glck, bob dylan, and toni morrison. earlier laureates william faulkner, ernest hemingway and john steinbeck have also been recognized as influential th century writers.in the visual arts, the hudson river school was a midthcentury movement in the tradition of european naturalism. the  armory show in new york city, an exhibition of european modernist art, shocked the public and transformed the u.s. art scene. georgia okeeffe, marsden hartley, and others experimented with new, individualistic styles, which would become known as american modernism.major artistic movements such as the abstract expressionism of jackson pollock and willem de kooning and the pop art of andy warhol and roy lichtenstein developed largely in the united states. major photographers include alfred stieglitz, edward steichen, dorothea lange, edward weston, james van der zee, ansel adams, and gordon parks.the uniquely american chicago school refers to two architectural styles derived from the architecture of chicago. in the history of architecture, the first chicago school was a school of architects active in chicago in the late th, and at the turn of the th century. they were among the first to promote the new technologies of steelframe construction in commercial buildings, and developed a spatial aesthetic which coevolved with, and then came to influence, parallel developments in european modernism. much of its early work is also known as commercial style. a second chicago school with a modernist aesthetic emerged in the s through s, which pioneered new building technologies and structural systems, such as the tubeframe structure. the tide of modernism and then postmodernism has brought global fame to american architects such as frank lloyd wright, philip johnson, and frank gehry. other americans who have had dramatic influences on national and international architecture include maya lin, frederick law olmstead, i.m. pei, and stanford white.

the united states is well known for its cinema and theater. its movie industry has a worldwide influence and following. hollywood, a district in northern los angeles, the nations secondmost populous city, is the leader in motion picture production and the most recognizable movie industry in the world. the major film studios of the united states are the primary source of the most commercially successful and most ticketselling movies in the world.

since the early th century, the u.s. film industry has largely been based in and around hollywood, although in the st century an increasing number of films are not made there, and film companies have been subject to the forces of globalization. the academy awards, popularly known as the oscars, have been held annually by the academy of motion picture arts and sciences since , and the golden globe awards have been held annually since january .director d. w. griffiths film adaptation of the clansman a historical romance of the ku klux klan was the first american blockbuster, earning the equivalent of . billion in current dollars. the technical achievements of the film revolutionized film grammar, while its subject matter caused both strident protest and a revitalization of the klan. producer and entrepreneur walt disney was a leader in both animated film and movie merchandising. directors such as john ford redefined the image of the american old west, and, like others such as john huston, broadened the possibilities of cinema with location shooting. the industry enjoyed its golden years, in what is commonly referred to as the golden age of hollywood, from the early sound period until the early s, with screen actors such as john wayne and marilyn monroe becoming iconic figures. in the s, new hollywood or the hollywood renaissance was defined by grittier films influenced by french and italian realist pictures of the postwar period.the st century has been marked by the rise of american streaming platforms, such as netflix, disney, paramount, and apple tv, which came to rival traditional cinema.mainstream theater in the united states derives from the old european theatrical tradition and has been heavily influenced by the british theater. in the th century, america had created new dramatic forms in the tom shows, the showboat theater and the minstrel show. the central hub of the american theater scene is manhattan, with its divisions of broadway, offbroadway, and offoffbroadway. many movie and television stars have gotten their big break working in new york productions. outside new york city, many cities have professional regional or resident theater companies that produce their own seasons. the biggestbudget theatrical productions are musicals. u.s. theater also has an active community theater culture.

american folk music encompasses numerous music genres, variously known as traditional music, traditional folk music, contemporary folk music, or roots music. many traditional songs have been sung within the same family or folk group for generations, and sometimes trace back to such origins as the british isles, mainland europe, or africa.the rhythmic and lyrical styles of africanamerican music have significantly influenced american music at large. the smithsonian institution states, africanamerican influences are so fundamental to american music that there would be no american music without them. one instrument first massproduced in the united states was the banjo, which had originally been crafted from gourds covered by animal skins by african slaves. banjos became widely popular in the th century due to their use in minstrel shows. country music developed in the s, and rhythm and blues in the s. elements from folk idioms such as the blues and what is known as oldtime music were adopted and transformed into popular genres with global audiences. jazz was developed by innovators such as louis armstrong and duke ellington early in the th century.elvis presley and chuck berry were among the pioneers of rock and roll in the mids. rock bands such as metallica, the eagles, and aerosmith are among the highest grossing musical acts in worldwide sales. in the s, bob dylan emerged from the folk revival to become one of the countrys most celebrated songwriters. midthcentury american pop stars such as bing crosby, frank sinatra, and elvis presley became global celebrities, as have artists of the late th century such as prince, michael jackson, madonna, whitney houston, and mariah carey. the musical forms of punk and hip hop both originated in the united states. american professional opera singers have reached the highest level of success in that form, including rene fleming, leontyne price, beverly sills, nelson eddy, and many others.american popular music, as part of the wider u.s. pop culture, has a worldwide influence and following. beyonc, taylor swift, miley cyrus, ariana grande, eminem, lady gaga, katy perry, and many other contemporary artists dominate global streaming rankings. the united states has the worlds largest music market with a total retail value of . billion in . most of the worlds major record companies are based in the u.s.; they are represented by the recording industry association of america .

early settlers were introduced by native americans to such indigenous, noneuropean foods as turkey, sweet potatoes, corn, squash, and maple syrup. of the most enduring and pervasive examples are variations of the native dish called succotash. early settlers and later immigrants combined these with foods they had known, such as wheat flour, beef, and milk to create a distinctive american cuisine. new world crops, especially corn and potatoes, and the native turkey as the main course are part of a shared national menu on one of americas most popular holidays, thanksgiving, when many americans make or purchase traditional dishes to celebrate the occasion.characteristic american dishes such as apple pie, fried chicken, doughnuts, french fries, macaroni and cheese, ice cream, pizza, hamburgers, and hot dogs derive from the recipes of various immigrant groups. mexican dishes such as burritos and tacos preexisted the united states in areas later annexed from mexico, and pasta dishes freely adapted from italian sources are all widely consumed.the american fast food industry, the worlds first and largest, pioneered the drivethrough format in the s and is often viewed as being a symbol of u.s. marketing dominance. companies such as mcdonalds, burger king, pizza hut, kentucky fried chicken, and dominos pizza, among others, have numerous outlets around the world,

american chefs have been influential both in the food industry and in popular culture. some important thcentury american chefs include charles ranhofer of delmonicos restaurant in new york, and bob payton, who is credited with bringing americanstyle pizza to the united kingdom. later, chefs charles scotto, louis pacquet, john massironi founded the american culinary federation in , taking after similar organizations across europe. in the s, chef james beard hosted the first nationally televised cooking show i love to eat. his is the namesake for the foundation and its prestigious cooking award recognizing excellence in the american cooking community. since beard, other chefs and cooking personalities have taken to television, and the success of the cooking channel and food network have contributed to the popularity of american cuisine. probably the bestknown television chef was julia child, who taught french cuisine in her weekly show, the french chef. in , the culinary institute of america was founded by katharine angell and frances roth. this would become the united states most prestigious culinary school, where many of the most talented american chefs would study prior to successful careers. the united states is home to over  michelin star rated restaurants,  of which are in new york city alone.

the most popular spectator sports in the u.s. are american football, basketball, baseball, soccer, and ice hockey, according to a  gallup poll. while most major u.s. sports such as baseball and american football have evolved out of european practices, basketball, volleyball, skateboarding, and snowboarding are american inventions, some of which have become popular worldwide. lacrosse and surfing arose from native american and native hawaiian activities that predate european contact. the market for professional sports in the united states was approximately  billion in july , roughly  larger than that of all of europe, the middle east, and africa combined.american football is by several measures the most popular spectator sport in the united states; the national football league  has the highest average attendance of any sports league in the world, and the super bowl is watched by tens of millions globally. baseball has been regarded as the u.s. national sport since the late th century, with major league baseball being the top league. basketball, soccer and ice hockey are the countrys next three most popular professional team sports, with the top leagues being the national basketball association and the national hockey league, which are also the premier leagues worldwide for these sports. the mostwatched individual sports in the u.s. are golf and auto racing, particularly nascar and indycar.on the collegiate level, earnings for the member institutions exceed  billion annually, and college football and basketball attract large audiences, as the ncaa final four is one of the most watched national sporting events. in many respects, the intercollegiate sports level serves as a feeder system to the professional level, as the elite college athletes are chosen to compete at the next level. this system differs greatly from nearly all other countries in the world, which generally have governmentfunded sports organizations that serve as a feeder system for professional competition.eight olympic games have taken place in the united states. the  summer olympics in st. louis, missouri, were the firstever olympic games held outside of europe. the olympic games will be held in the u.s. for a ninth time when los angeles hosts the  summer olympics. u.s. athletes have won a total of , medals  at the olympic games, by far the most of any country.in international soccer, the mens national soccer team qualified for eleven world cups, and the womens national team has won the fifa womens world cup and olympic soccer tournament four times each. the united states hosted the  fifa world cup and will cohost, along with canada and mexico, the  fifa world cup.

world war i , also known as the first world war or the great war in historical contexts, was a major global conflict fought between two coalitions, the allied powers and the central powers. fighting took place throughout europe, the middle east, africa, the pacific, and parts of asia. one of the deadliest wars in history, it resulted in an estimated  million soldiers dead and  million wounded, plus another  million civilian deaths from various causes. millions more died as a result of genocide, and the war was a major factor in the  spanish flu pandemic.

the first decade of the th century saw increasing diplomatic tension between the european great powers. this reached a breaking point on  june , when a bosnian serb named gavrilo princip assassinated archduke franz ferdinand, heir to the austrohungarian throne. austriahungary held serbia responsible, and declared war on  july. russia came to serbias defence, and by  august, germany, france, and britain were drawn into the war, with the ottoman empire joining in november of that same year.

germanys strategy in  was to first defeat france, then transfer forces to the russian front. however, this failed, and by the end of , the western front consisted of a continuous line of trenches stretching from the english channel to switzerland. the eastern front was more dynamic, but neither side could gain a decisive advantage, despite costly offensives. as the war expanded to more fronts, bulgaria, romania, greece, italy and others joined in from  onward. 

in early , the united states entered the war on the side of the allies, and later the same year, the bolsheviks seized power in the russian october revolution, making peace with the central powers in early . germany launched an offensive in the west in march , and despite initial success, it left the german army exhausted and demoralised. a successful allied counteroffensive later that year caused a collapse of the german frontline. by the end of , bulgaria, the ottoman empire and austriahungary agreed to armistices with the allies, leaving germany isolated. facing revolution at home and with his army on the verge of mutiny, kaiser wilhelm ii abdicated on  november. 

fighting ended with the armistice of  november , while the subsequent paris peace conference imposed various settlements on the defeated powers, notably the treaty of versailles. the dissolution of the russian, german, austrohungarian, and ottoman empires resulted in the creation of new independent states, including poland, finland, czechoslovakia, and yugoslavia. the inability to manage postwar instability contributed to the outbreak of world war ii in september .

the term world war was first coined in september  by german biologist and philosopher ernst haeckel. he claimed that there is no doubt that the course and character of the feared european war ... will become the first world war in the full sense of the word, in the indianapolis star on  september .

the term first world war had been used by ltcol. charles  court repington, as a title for his memoirs ; he had noted his discussion on the matter with a major johnstone of harvard university in his diary entry of  september .prior to world war ii, the events of  were generally known as the great war or simply the world war. in august , the magazine the independent wrote this is the great war. it names itself. in october , the canadian magazine macleans similarly wrote, some wars name themselves. this is the great war. contemporary europeans also referred to it as the war to end war and it was also described as the war to end all wars due to their perception of its unparalleled scale, devastation, and loss of life.

for much of the th century, the major european powers maintained a tenuous balance of power among themselves, known as the concert of europe. after , this was challenged by a variety of factors, including britains withdrawal into socalled splendid isolation, the decline of the ottoman empire, new imperialism, and the rise of prussia under otto von bismarck. the  austroprussian war established prussian hegemony in germany, while victory in the  francoprussian war allowed bismarck to consolidate the german states into a german empire under prussian leadership. avenging the defeat of , or revanchism, and recovering the provinces of alsacelorraine became the principal objects of french policy for the next forty years.

in order to isolate france and avoid a war on two fronts, bismarck negotiated the league of the three emperors  between austriahungary, russia and germany. after russian victory in the  russoturkish war, the league was dissolved due to austrian concerns over russian influence in the balkans, an area they considered of vital strategic interest. germany and austriahungary then formed the  dual alliance, which became the triple alliance when italy joined in . for bismarck, the purpose of these agreements was to isolate france by ensuring the three empires resolved any disputes between themselves; when this was threatened in  by british and french attempts to negotiate directly with russia, he reformed the league in , which was renewed in  and . after the agreement lapsed in , he replaced it with the reinsurance treaty, a secret agreement between germany and russia to remain neutral if either were attacked by france or austriahungary.bismarck viewed peace with russia as the foundation of german foreign policy but after becoming kaiser in , wilhelm ii forced him to retire and was persuaded not to renew the reinsurance treaty by his new chancellor, leo von caprivi. this provided france an opportunity to counteract the triple alliance by signing the francorussian alliance in , followed by the  entente cordiale with britain. the triple entente was completed by the  anglorussian convention. while these were not formal alliances, by settling longstanding colonial disputes in africa and asia, the notion of british entry into any future conflict involving france or russia became a possibility. british and russian support for france against germany during the agadir crisis in  reinforced their relationship and increased anglogerman estrangement, deepening the divisions that would erupt in .

german industrial strength and production significantly increased after , driven by the creation of a unified reich, french indemnity payments, and the annexation of alsacelorraine. backed by wilhelm ii, admiral alfred von tirpitz sought to use this growth in economic power to build a kaiserliche marine, or imperial german navy, which could compete with the british royal navy for world naval supremacy. his thinking was influenced by us naval strategist alfred thayer mahan, who argued possession of a bluewater navy was vital for global power projection; tirpitz had his books translated into german, while wilhelm made them required reading for his advisors and senior military personnel.however, it was also an emotional decision, driven by wilhelms simultaneous admiration for the royal navy and desire to outdo and surpass it. bismarck thought that the british would not interfere in europe, so long as its maritime supremacy remained secure, but his dismissal in  led to a change in policy and an anglogerman naval arms race began. despite the vast sums spent by tirpitz, the launch of hms dreadnought in  gave the british a technological advantage over their german rivals which they never lost. ultimately, the race diverted huge resources into creating a german navy large enough to antagonise britain, but not defeat it; in , chancellor theobald von bethmann hollweg acknowledged defeat, leading to the rstungswende or armaments turning point, when he switched expenditure from the navy to the army.

this decision was not driven by a reduction in political tensions, but german concern over russias quick recovery from its defeat in the russojapanese war and subsequent  russian revolution that same year. economic reforms backed by funding from the french led to a significant post expansion of railways and transportation infrastructure, particularly in its western border regions. since germany and austriahungary relied on faster mobilisation to compensate for their numerical inferiority compared to russia, the threat posed by the closing of this gap was more important than competing with the royal navy. after germany expanded its standing army by , troops in , france extended compulsory military service from two to three years; similar measures were taken by the balkan powers and italy, which led to increased expenditure by the ottomans and austriahungary. absolute figures are hard to calculate due to differences in categorising expenditure, since they often omit civilian infrastructure projects like railways which also had logistical importance and military use. it is known, however, that from  to , military spending by the six major european powers increased by over  in real terms.

the years before  were marked by a series of crises in the balkans as other powers sought to benefit from ottoman decline. while panslavic and orthodox russia considered itself the protector of serbia and other slav states, they preferred the strategically vital bosporus straits to be controlled by a weak ottoman government, rather than an ambitious slav power like bulgaria. since russia had its own ambitions in northeastern anatolia and their clients had overlapping claims in the balkans, balancing these divided russian policymakers and added to regional instability.austrian statesmen viewed the balkans as essential for the continued existence of their empire, and saw serbian expansion as a direct threat. the  bosnian crisis began when austria annexed the former ottoman territory of bosnia and herzegovina, which it had occupied since . timed to coincide with the bulgarian declaration of independence from the ottoman empire, this unilateral action was denounced by the european powers, but accepted as there was no consensus on how to resolve the situation. some historians see this as a significant escalation, ending any chance of austria cooperating with russia in the balkans while also damaging diplomatic relations between serbia and italy, both of whom had their own expansionist ambitions in the region.tensions increased after the  italoturkish war demonstrated ottoman weakness and led to the formation of the balkan league, an alliance of serbia, bulgaria, montenegro, and greece. the league quickly overran most of the ottomans territory in the balkans during the  first balkan war, much to the surprise of outside observers. the serbian capture of ports on the adriatic resulted in partial austrian mobilisation starting on  november , including units along the russian border in galicia. in a meeting the next day, the russian government decided not to mobilise in response, unwilling to precipitate a war for which they were not as of yet prepared to handle.the great powers sought to reassert control through the  treaty of london, which created an independent albania, while enlarging the territories of bulgaria, serbia, montenegro and greece. however, disputes between the victors sparked the day second balkan war, when bulgaria attacked serbia and greece on  june ; it was defeated, losing most of macedonia to serbia and greece, and southern dobruja to romania. the result was that even countries which benefited from the balkan wars, such as serbia and greece, felt cheated of their rightful gains, while for austria it demonstrated the apparent indifference with which other powers viewed their concerns, including germany. this complex mix of resentment, nationalism and insecurity helps explain why the pre balkans became known as the powder keg of europe.

on  june , archduke franz ferdinand of austria, heir presumptive to emperor franz joseph, visited sarajevo, capital of the recently annexed provinces of bosnia and herzegovina. six assassins from the movement known as young bosnia, or mlada bosna, took up positions along the route taken by the archdukes motorcade, with the intention of assassinating him. supplied with arms by extremists within the serbian black hand intelligence organisation, they hoped his death would free bosnia from austrian rule, although there was little agreement on what would replace it.nedeljko abrinovi threw a grenade at the archdukes car and injured two of his aides, who were taken to hospital while the convoy carried on. the other assassins were also unsuccessful but an hour later, as ferdinand was returning from visiting the injured officers, his car took a wrong turn into a street where gavrilo princip was standing. he stepped forward and fired two pistol shots, fatally wounding ferdinand and his wife sophie, who both died shortly thereafter. although emperor franz joseph was shocked by the incident, political and personal differences meant the two men were not close; allegedly, his first reported comment was a higher power has reestablished the order which i, alas, could not preserve.according to historian zbynk zeman, his reaction was reflected more broadly in vienna, where the event almost failed to make any impression whatsoever. on  and  june, the crowds listened to music and drank wine, as if nothing had happened. nevertheless, the impact of the murder of the heir to the throne was significant, and has been described by historian christopher clark as a / effect, a terrorist event charged with historic meaning, transforming the political chemistry in vienna.

the austrohungarian authorities encouraged the subsequent antiserb riots in sarajevo, in which bosnian croats and bosniaks killed two bosnian serbs and damaged numerous serbowned buildings. violent actions against ethnic serbs were also organised outside sarajevo, in other cities in austrohungariancontrolled bosnia and herzegovina, croatia and slovenia. austrohungarian authorities in bosnia and herzegovina imprisoned and extradited approximately , prominent serbs,  to , of whom died in prison. a further  serbs were sentenced to death. a predominantly bosniak special militia known as the schutzkorps was established and carried out the persecution of serbs.

the assassination initiated the july crisis, a month of diplomatic manoeuvring between austriahungary, germany, russia, france and britain. believing serbian intelligence helped organise franz ferdinands murder, austrian officials wanted to use the opportunity to end their interference in bosnia and saw war as the best way of achieving this. however, the foreign ministry had no solid proof of serbian involvement and a dossier used to make its case was riddled with errors. on  july, austria delivered an ultimatum to serbia, listing ten demands made intentionally unacceptable to provide an excuse for starting hostilities.

serbia ordered general mobilisation on  july, but accepted all the terms, except for those empowering austrian representatives to suppress subversive elements inside serbia, and take part in the investigation and trial of serbians linked to the assassination. claiming this amounted to rejection, austria broke off diplomatic relations and ordered partial mobilisation the next day; on  july, they declared war on serbia and began shelling belgrade. having initiated war preparations on  july, russia now ordered general mobilisation in support of serbia on th.anxious to ensure backing from the spd political opposition by presenting russia as the aggressor, german chancellor bethmann hollweg delayed commencement of war preparations until  july. that afternoon the russian government were handed a note requiring them to cease all war measures against germany and austriahungary within  hours. a further german demand for neutrality was refused by the french who ordered general mobilisation but delayed declaring war. the german general staff had long assumed they faced a war on two fronts; the schlieffen plan envisaged using  of the army to defeat france in the west, then switch to russia. since this required them to move quickly, mobilisation orders were issued that afternoon.

at a meeting on  july, the british cabinet had narrowly decided its obligations to belgium under the  treaty of london did not require it to oppose a german invasion with military force. however, this was largely driven by prime minister asquiths desire to maintain unity; he and his senior cabinet ministers were already committed to support france, the royal navy had been mobilised and public opinion was strongly in favour of intervention. on  july, britain sent notes to germany and france, asking them to respect belgian neutrality; france pledged to do so, germany did not reply.once the german ultimatum to russia expired on the morning of  august, the two countries were at war. later the same day, wilhelm was informed by his ambassador in london, prince lichnowsky, that britain would remain neutral if france was not attacked, and might not intervene at all given the ongoing home rule crisis in ireland. jubilant at this news, he ordered general moltke, the german chief of staff, to march the whole of the ... army to the east. this allegedly brought moltke to the verge of a nervous breakdown, who protested that it cannot be done. the deployment of millions cannot be improvised. lichnowsky soon realised he was mistaken, although wilhelm insisted on waiting for a telegram from his cousin george v; once received it confirmed there had been a misunderstanding, and he told moltke, now do what you want.aware of german plans to attack through belgium, french commanderinchief joseph joffre asked his government for permission to cross the border and preempt such a move. to avoid a violation of belgian neutrality, he was told any advance could come only after a german invasion. on  august, germany occupied luxembourg and exchanged fire with french units; on  august, they declared war on france and demanded free passage across belgium, which was refused. early on the morning of  august, the germans invaded and albert i of belgium called for assistance under the treaty of london. britain sent germany an ultimatum demanding they withdraw from belgium; when this expired at midnight without a response, the two empires were at war.

the strategy of the central powers suffered from miscommunication. germany had promised to support austriahungarys invasion of serbia, but interpretations of what this meant differed. previously tested deployment plans had been replaced early in , but those had never been tested in exercises. austrohungarian leaders believed germany would cover its northern flank against russia.

beginning on  august, the austrian and serbs clashed at the battles of the cer and kolubara; over the next two weeks, austrian attacks were repulsed with heavy losses, dashing their hopes of a swift victory and marking the first major allied victories of the war. as a result, austria had to keep sizeable forces on the serbian front, weakening its efforts against russia. serbias defeat of the  invasion has been called one of the major upset victories of the twentieth century. in spring , the campaign saw the first use of antiaircraft warfare after an austrian plane was shot down with groundtoair fire, as well as the first medical evacuation by the serbian army in autumn .

upon mobilisation in ,  of the german army was located on the western front, with the remainder acting as a screening force in the east; officially titled aufmarsch ii west, it is better known as the schlieffen plan after its creator, alfred von schlieffen, head of the german general staff from  to . rather than a direct attack across their shared frontier, the german right wing would sweep through the netherlands and belgium, then swing south, encircling paris and trapping the french army against the swiss border. schlieffen estimated this would take six weeks, after which the german army would transfer to the east and defeat the russians.the plan was substantially modified by his successor, helmuth von moltke the younger. under schlieffen,  of german forces in the west were assigned to the right wing, with the remainder holding along the frontier. by keeping his left wing deliberately weak, he hoped to lure the french into an offensive into the lost provinces of alsacelorraine, which was in fact the strategy envisaged by their plan xvii. however, moltke grew concerned the french might push too hard on his left flank and as the german army increased in size from  to , he changed the allocation of forces between the two wings from  to . he also considered dutch neutrality essential for german trade and cancelled the incursion into the netherlands, which meant any delays in belgium threatened the entire viability of the plan. historian richard holmes argues these changes meant the right wing was not strong enough to achieve decisive success and thus led to unrealistic goals and timings.

the initial german advance in the west was very successful and by the end of august the allied left, which included the british expeditionary force , was in full retreat. at the same time, the french offensive in alsacelorraine was a disastrous failure, with casualties exceeding ,, including , killed on  august during the battle of the frontiers. german planning provided broad strategic instructions, while allowing army commanders considerable freedom in carrying them out at the front; this worked well in  and  but in , von kluck used this freedom to disobey orders, opening a gap between the german armies as they closed on paris.in , the russian stavka had agreed with the french to attack germany within fifteen days of mobilisation, ten days before the germans had anticipated, although it meant the two russian armies that entered east prussia on  august did so without many of their support elements.by the end of , german troops held strong defensive positions inside france, controlled the bulk of frances domestic coalfields and had inflicted , more casualties than it lost itself. however, communications problems and questionable command decisions cost germany the chance of a decisive outcome, while it had failed to achieve the primary objective of avoiding a long, twofront war. as was apparent to a number of german leaders, this amounted to a strategic defeat; shortly after the marne, crown prince wilhelm told an american reporter; we have lost the war. it will go on for a long time but lost it is already.

on  august , new zealand occupied german samoa, now the independent state of samoa. on  september, the australian naval and military expeditionary force landed on the island of new britain, then part of german new guinea. on  october, the german cruiser sms emden sank the russian cruiser zhemchug in the battle of penang. japan declared war on germany prior to seizing territories in the pacific which later became the south seas mandate, as well as german treaty ports on the chinese shandong peninsula at tsingtao. after vienna refused to withdraw its cruiser sms kaiserin elisabeth from tsingtao, japan declared war on austriahungary as well, and the ship was sunk at tsingtao in november . within a few months, allied forces had seized all german territories in the pacific, leaving only isolated commerce raiders and a few holdouts in new guinea.

some of the first clashes of the war involved british, french, and german colonial forces in africa. on  august, french and british troops invaded the german protectorate of togoland and kamerun. on  august, german forces in southwest africa attacked south africa; sporadic and fierce fighting continued for the rest of the war. the german colonial forces in german east africa, led by colonel paul von lettowvorbeck, fought a guerrilla warfare campaign during world war i and only surrendered two weeks after the armistice took effect in europe.

prior to the war, germany had attempted to use indian nationalism and panislamism to its advantage, a policy continued post by instigating uprisings in india, while the niedermayerhentig expedition urged afghanistan to join the war on the side of central powers. however, contrary to british fears of a revolt in india, the outbreak of the war saw a reduction in nationalist activity. this was largely because leaders from the indian national congress and other groups believed support for the british war effort would hasten indian home rule, a promise allegedly made explicit in  by edwin montagu, then secretary of state for india.in , the british indian army was larger than the british army itself, and between  and  an estimated . million indian soldiers and labourers served in europe, africa, and the middle east, while the government of india and their princely allies supplied large quantities of food, money, and ammunition. in all, , soldiers served on the western front and nearly , in the middle east, with , killed and , wounded.the suffering engendered by the war, as well as the failure of the british government to grant selfgovernment to india after the end of hostilities, bred disillusionment and resulted in the campaign for full independence led by mahatma gandhi.

prewar military tactics that emphasised open warfare and the individual rifleman proved obsolete when confronted with conditions prevailing in . technological advances allowed the creation of strong defensive systems largely impervious to massed infantry advances, such as barbed wire, machine guns and above all far more powerful artillery, which dominated the battlefield and made crossing open ground extremely difficult. both sides struggled to develop tactics for breaching entrenched positions without suffering heavy casualties. in time, however, technology enabled the production of new offensive weapons, such as gas warfare and the tank.after the first battle of the marne in september , allied and german forces unsuccessfully tried to outflank each other, a series of manoeuvres later known as the race to the sea. by the end of , the opposing forces confronted each other along an uninterrupted line of entrenched positions from the channel to the swiss border. since the germans were normally able to choose where to stand, they generally held the high ground, while their trenches tended to be better built; those constructed by the french and english were initially considered temporary, only needed until an offensive would smash the german defences. both sides tried to break the stalemate using scientific and technological advances. on  april , at the second battle of ypres, the germans  used chlorine gas for the first time on the western front. several types of gas soon became widely used by both sides, and though it never proved a decisive, battlewinning weapon, it became one of the mostfeared and bestremembered horrors of the war.

in february  the germans attacked french defensive positions at the battle of verdun, lasting until december . the germans made initial gains, before french counterattacks returned matters to near their starting point. casualties were greater for the french, but the germans bled heavily as well, with anywhere from , to , casualties suffered between the two combatants. verdun became a symbol of french determination and selfsacrifice.the battle of the somme was an anglofrench offensive of july to november . the opening day on  july  was the bloodiest single day in the history of the british army, which suffered , casualties, including , dead. as a whole, the somme offensive led to an estimated , british casualties, along with , french and , german. gun fire was not the only factor taking lives; the diseases that emerged in the trenches were a major killer on both sides. the living conditions made it so that countless diseases and infections occurred, such as trench foot, shell shock, blindness/burns from mustard gas, lice, trench fever, cooties  and the spanish flu.

at the start of the war, german cruisers were scattered across the globe, some of which were subsequently used to attack allied merchant shipping. the british royal navy systematically hunted them down, though not without some embarrassment from its inability to protect allied shipping. for example, the light cruiser sms emden, which was part of the german east asia squadron stationed at qingdao, seized or sank  merchantmen, as well as a russian cruiser and a french destroyer. most of the squadron was returning to germany when it sank two british armoured cruisers at the battle of coronel in november , before being virtually destroyed at the battle of the falkland islands in december. the sms dresden escaped with a few auxiliaries, but after the battle of ms a tierra, these too had either been destroyed or interned.soon after the outbreak of hostilities, britain began a naval blockade of germany. the strategy proved effective, cutting off vital military and civilian supplies, although this blockade violated accepted international law codified by several international agreements of the past two centuries. britain mined international waters to prevent any ships from entering entire sections of ocean, causing danger to even neutral ships. since there was limited response to this tactic of the british, germany expected a similar response to its unrestricted submarine warfare.the battle of jutland  in may/june  developed into the largest naval battle of the war. it was the only fullscale clash of battleships during the war, and one of the largest in history. the kaiserliche marines high seas fleet, commanded by vice admiral reinhard scheer, fought the royal navys grand fleet, led by admiral sir john jellicoe. the engagement was a stand off, as the germans were outmanoeuvred by the larger british fleet, but managed to escape and inflicted more damage to the british fleet than they received. strategically, however, the british asserted their control of the sea, and the bulk of the german surface fleet remained confined to port for the duration of the war.

german uboats attempted to cut the supply lines between north america and britain. the nature of submarine warfare meant that attacks often came without warning, giving the crews of the merchant ships little hope of survival. the united states launched a protest, and germany changed its rules of engagement. after the sinking of the passenger ship rms lusitania in , germany promised not to target passenger liners, while britain armed its merchant ships, placing them beyond the protection of the cruiser rules, which demanded warning and movement of crews to a place of safety . finally, in early , germany adopted a policy of unrestricted submarine warfare, realising the americans would eventually enter the war. germany sought to strangle allied sea lanes before the united states could transport a large army overseas, but after initial successes eventually failed to do so.the uboat threat lessened in , when merchant ships began travelling in convoys, escorted by destroyers. this tactic made it difficult for uboats to find targets, which significantly lessened losses; after the hydrophone and depth charges were introduced, accompanying destroyers could attack a submerged submarine with some hope of success. convoys slowed the flow of supplies since ships had to wait as convoys were assembled. the solution to the delays was an extensive program of building new freighters. troopships were too fast for the submarines and did not travel the north atlantic in convoys. the uboats had sunk more than , allied ships, at a cost of  submarines.world war i also saw the first use of aircraft carriers in combat, with hms furious launching sopwith camels in a successful raid against the zeppelin hangars at tondern in july , as well as blimps for antisubmarine patrol.

faced with russia in the east, austriahungary could spare only onethird of its army to attack serbia. after suffering heavy losses, the austrians briefly occupied the serbian capital, belgrade. a serbian counterattack in the battle of kolubara succeeded in driving them from the country by the end of . for the first ten months of , austriahungary used most of its military reserves to fight italy. german and austrohungarian diplomats, however, scored a coup by persuading bulgaria to join the attack on serbia. the austrohungarian provinces of slovenia, croatia and bosnia provided troops for austriahungary in the fight with serbia, russia and italy. montenegro allied itself with serbia.bulgaria declared war on serbia on  october  and joined in the attack by the austrohungarian army under mackensens army of , that was already underway. serbia was conquered in a little more than a month, as the central powers, now including bulgaria, sent in , troops total. the serbian army, fighting on two fronts and facing certain defeat, retreated into northern albania. the serbs suffered defeat in the battle of kosovo. montenegro covered the serbian retreat towards the adriatic coast in the battle of mojkovac in  january , but ultimately the austrians also conquered montenegro. the surviving serbian soldiers were evacuated by ship to greece. after conquest, serbia was divided between austrohungary and bulgaria.in late , a francobritish force landed at salonica in greece to offer assistance and to pressure its government to declare war against the central powers. however, the progerman king constantine i dismissed the proallied government of eleftherios venizelos before the allied expeditionary force arrived.the macedonian front was initially mostly static. french and serbian forces retook limited areas of macedonia by recapturing bitola on  november  following the costly monastir offensive, which brought stabilisation of the front.

serbian and french troops finally made a breakthrough in september  in the vardar offensive, after most of the german and austrohungarian troops had been withdrawn. the bulgarians were defeated at the battle of dobro pole, and by  september british and french troops had crossed the border into bulgaria proper as the bulgarian army collapsed. bulgaria capitulated four days later, on  september . the german high command responded by despatching troops to hold the line, but these forces were far too weak to reestablish a front.the disappearance of the macedonian front meant that the road to budapest and vienna was now opened to allied forces. hindenburg and ludendorff concluded that the strategic and operational balance had now shifted decidedly against the central powers and, a day after the bulgarian collapse, insisted on an immediate peace settlement.

the ottomans threatened russias caucasian territories and britains communications with india via the suez canal. as the conflict progressed, the ottoman empire took advantage of the european powers preoccupation with the war and conducted largescale ethnic cleansing of the indigenous armenian, greek, and assyrian christian populations, known as the armenian genocide, greek genocide, and sayfo respectively.the british and french opened overseas fronts with the gallipoli  and mesopotamian campaigns . in gallipoli, the ottoman empire successfully repelled the british, french, and australian and new zealand army corps . in mesopotamia, by contrast, after the defeat of the british defenders in the siege of kut by the ottomans , british imperial forces reorganised and captured baghdad in march . the british were aided in mesopotamia by local arab and assyrian fighters, while the ottomans employed local kurdish and turcoman tribes.further to the west, the suez canal was defended from ottoman attacks in  and ; in august, a german and ottoman force was defeated at the battle of romani by the anzac mounted division and the nd  infantry division. following this victory, an egyptian expeditionary force advanced across the sinai peninsula, pushing ottoman forces back in the battle of magdhaba in december and the battle of rafa on the border between the egyptian sinai and ottoman palestine in january .russian armies generally had success in the caucasus campaign. enver pasha, supreme commander of the ottoman armed forces, was ambitious and dreamed of reconquering central asia and areas that had been lost to russia previously. he was, however, a poor commander. he launched an offensive against the russians in the caucasus in december  with , troops, insisting on a frontal attack against mountainous russian positions in winter. he lost  of his force at the battle of sarikamish.

the ottoman empire, with german support, invaded persia  in december  in an effort to cut off british and russian access to petroleum reservoirs around baku near the caspian sea. persia, ostensibly neutral, had long been under the spheres of british and russian influence. the ottomans and germans were aided by kurdish and azeri forces, together with a large number of major iranian tribes, such as the qashqai, tangistanis, lurs, and khamseh, while the russians and british had the support of armenian and assyrian forces. the persian campaign was to last until  and end in failure for the ottomans and their allies. however, the russian withdrawal from the war in  led to armenian and assyrian forces, who had hitherto inflicted a series of defeats upon the forces of the ottomans and their allies, being cut off from supply lines, outnumbered, outgunned and isolated, forcing them to fight and flee towards british lines in northern mesopotamia.

general yudenich, the russian commander from  to , drove the turks out of most of the southern caucasus with a string of victories.the arab revolt, instigated by the arab bureau of the british foreign office, started june  with the battle of mecca, led by sharif hussein of mecca, and ended with the ottoman surrender of damascus. fakhri pasha, the ottoman commander of medina, resisted for more than two and half years during the siege of medina before surrendering in january .the senussi tribe, along the border of italian libya and british egypt, incited and armed by the turks, waged a smallscale guerrilla war against allied troops. the british were forced to dispatch , troops to oppose them in the senussi campaign. their rebellion was finally crushed in mid.total allied casualties on the ottoman fronts amounted , men. total ottoman casualties were ,, with , dead and , wounded.

although italy joined the triple alliance in , a treaty with its traditional austrian enemy was so controversial that subsequent governments denied its existence and the terms were only made public in . this arose from nationalist designs on austrohungarian territory in trentino, the austrian littoral, rijeka and dalmatia, which were considered vital to secure the borders established in . in , rome secretly agreed with france to remain neutral if the latter was attacked by germany, effectively nullifying its role in the triple alliance.

when the war began in , italy argued the triple alliance was defensive in nature and it was not obliged to support an austrian attack on serbia. opposition to joining the central powers increased when turkey became a member in september, since in  italy had occupied ottoman possessions in libya and the dodecanese islands. to secure italian neutrality, the central powers offered them the french protectorate of tunisia, while in return for an immediate entry into the war, the allies agreed to their demands for austrian territory and sovereignty over the dodecanese. although they remained secret, these provisions were incorporated into the april  treaty of london; italy joined the triple entente and on  may declared war on austriahungary, followed by germany fifteen months later.

the pre italian army was the weakest in europe, short of officers, trained men, adequate transport and modern weapons; by april , some of these deficiencies had been remedied but it was still unprepared for the major offensive required by the treaty of london. the advantage of superior numbers was offset by the difficult terrain; much of the fighting took place at altitudes of over  metres in the alps and dolomites, where trench lines had to be cut through rock and ice and keeping troops supplied was a major challenge. these issues were exacerbated by unimaginative strategies and tactics. between  and , the italian commander, luigi cadorna, undertook a series of frontal assaults along the isonzo which made little progress and cost many lives; by the end of the war, total italian combat deaths totalled around ,.in the spring of , the austrohungarians counterattacked in asiago in the strafexpedition, but made little progress and were pushed by the italians back to the tyrol. although an italian corps occupied southern albania in may , their main focus was the isonzo front which after the capture of gorizia in august  remained static until october . after a combined austrogerman force won a major victory at caporetto, cadorna was replaced by armando diaz who retreated more than  kilometres  before holding positions along the piave river. a second austrian offensive was repulsed in june  and by october it was clear the central powers had lost the war. on  october, diaz launched the battle of vittorio veneto and initially met stubborn resistance,  but with austriahungary collapsing, hungarian divisions in italy now demanded they be sent home. when this was granted, many others followed and the imperial army disintegrated, the italians taking over , prisoners. on  november, the armistice of villa giusti ended hostilities between austriahungary and italy which occupied trieste and areas along the adriatic sea awarded to it in .

despite secretly agreeing to support the triple alliance in , romania increasingly found itself at odds with the central powers over their support for bulgaria in the  to  balkan wars and the status of ethnic romanian communities in hungariancontrolled transylvania, which comprised an estimated . million of the . million population. with the ruling elite split into progerman and proentente factions, romania remained neutral in , arguing like italy that because austriahungary had declared war on serbia, it was under no obligation to join them. they maintained this position for the next two years, while allowing germany and austria to transport military supplies and advisors across romanian territory.in september , russia had acknowledged romanian rights to austrohungarian territories including transylvania and banat, whose acquisition had widespread popular support,  and russian success against austria led romania to join the entente in the august  treaty of bucharest. under the strategic plan known as hypothesis z, the romanian army planned an offensive into transylvania, while defending southern dobruja and giurgiu against a possible bulgarian counterattack. on  august , they attacked transylvania and occupied substantial parts of the province before being driven back by the recently formed german th army, led by former chief of staff falkenhayn. a combined germanbulgarianturkish offensive captured dobruja and giurgiu, although the bulk of the romanian army managed to escape encirclement and retreated to bucharest, which surrendered to the central powers on  december .

on  may  romania signed the treaty of bucharest with the central powers, which recognised romanian sovereignty over bessarabia in return for ceding control of passes in the carpathian mountains to austriahungary and granting oil concessions to germany. although approved by parliament, ferdinand i refused to sign the treaty, hoping for an allied victory; romania reentered the war on  november  on the side of the allies and the treaty of bucharest was formally annulled by the armistice of  november . between  and , an estimated , to , ethnic romanians served with the austrohungarian army, of whom up to , were killed in action; total military and civilian deaths within contemporary romanian borders are estimated at ,.

as previously agreed with france, russian plans at the start of the war were to simultaneously advance into austrian galicia and east prussia as soon as possible. although their attack on galicia was largely successful, and the invasions achieved their aim of forcing germany to divert troops from the western front, the speed of mobilisation meant they did so without much of their heavy equipment and support functions. these weaknesses contributed to russian defeats at tannenberg and the masurian lakes in august and september , forcing them to withdraw from east prussia with heavy losses. by spring , they had also retreated from galicia, and the may  gorlicetarnw offensive then allowed the central powers to invade russianoccupied poland.despite the successful june  brusilov offensive against the austrians in eastern galicia, shortages of supplies, heavy losses and command failures prevented the russians from fully exploiting their victory. however, it was one of the most significant and impactful offensives of the war, diverting german resources from verdun, relieving austrohungarian pressure on the italians, and convincing romania to enter the war on the side of the allies on  august. it also fatally weakened both the austrian and russian armies, whose offensive capabilities were badly affected by their losses and increased the disillusionment with the war that ultimately led to the russian revolutions.meanwhile, unrest grew in russia as the tsar remained at the front, with the home front controlled by empress alexandra. her increasingly incompetent rule and food shortages in urban areas led to widespread protests and the murder of her favourite, grigori rasputin, at the end of .

on  december , after ten brutal months of the battle of verdun and a successful offensive against romania, germany attempted to negotiate a peace with the allies. however, this attempt was rejected out of hand as a duplicitous war ruse.soon after, us president woodrow wilson attempted to intervene as a peacemaker, asking in a note for both sides to state their demands and start negotiations. lloyd georges war cabinet considered the german offer to be a ploy to create divisions amongst the allies. after initial outrage and much deliberation, they took wilsons note as a separate effort, signalling that the united states was on the verge of entering the war against germany following the submarine outrages. while the allies debated a response to wilsons offer, the germans chose to rebuff it in favour of a direct exchange of views. learning of the german response, the allied governments were free to make clear demands in their response of  january. they sought restoration of damages, the evacuation of occupied territories, reparations for france, russia and romania, and a recognition of the principle of nationalities. this included the liberation of italians, slavs, romanians, czechoslovaks, and the creation of a free and united poland. on the question of security, the allies sought guarantees that would prevent or limit future wars, complete with sanctions, as a condition of any peace settlement. the negotiations failed and the entente powers rejected the german offer on the grounds that germany had not put forward any specific proposals.

by the end of , russian casualties totalled nearly five million killed, wounded or captured, with major urban areas affected by food shortages and high prices. in march , tsar nicholas ordered the military to forcibly suppress a wave of strikes in petrograd but the troops refused to fire on the crowds. revolutionaries set up the petrograd soviet and fearing a leftwing takeover, the state duma forced nicholas to abdicate and established the russian provisional government, which confirmed russias willingness to continue the war. however, the petrograd soviet refused to disband, creating competing power centres and caused confusion and chaos, with frontline soldiers becoming increasingly demoralised and unwilling to fight on.following the tsars abdication, vladimir leninwith the help of the german governmentwas ushered by train from switzerland into russia on  april . discontent and the weaknesses of the provisional government led to a rise in the popularity of the bolshevik party, led by lenin, which demanded an immediate end to the war. the revolution of november was followed in december by an armistice and negotiations with germany. at first, the bolsheviks refused the german terms, but when german troops began marching across ukraine unopposed, the new government acceded to the treaty of brestlitovsk on  march . the treaty ceded vast territories, including finland, estonia, latvia, lithuania, parts of poland and ukraine to the central powers.with the russian empire out of the war, romania found itself alone on the eastern front and signed the treaty of bucharest with the central powers in may , ending the state of war between romania and the central powers. under the terms of the treaty, romania had to give territory to austriahungary and bulgaria, and lease its oil reserves to germany. however, the terms also included the central powers recognition of the union of bessarabia with romania.

the united states was a major supplier of war materiel to the allies but remained neutral in , in large part due to domestic opposition. the most significant factor in creating the support wilson needed was the german submarine offensive, which not only cost american lives, but paralysed trade as ships were reluctant to put to sea.on  april , congress declared war on germany as an associated power of the allies. the united states navy sent a battleship group to scapa flow to join the grand fleet and provided convoy escorts. in april , the united states army had fewer than , men, including national guard units, compared to british and french armies of . and . million respectively. the selective service act of  drafted . million men, although training and equipping such numbers was a huge logistical challenge. by june , over , members of the american expeditionary forces , had been transported to france, a figure which reached  million by the end of november.despite his conviction germany must be defeated, wilson went to war to ensure the us played a leading role in shaping the peace, which meant preserving the aef as a separate military force, rather than being absorbed into british or french units as his allies wanted. he was strongly supported by aef commander general john j. pershing, a proponent of pre open warfare who considered the french and british emphasis on artillery as misguided and incompatible with american offensive spirit. much to the frustration of his allies, who had suffered heavy losses in , he insisted on retaining control of american troops and refused to commit them to the front line until able to operate as independent units. as a result, the first significant us involvement was the meuseargonne offensive in late september .

in december , robert nivelle replaced ptain as commander of french armies on the western front and began planning a spring attack in champagne, part of a joint francobritish operation. nivelle claimed the capture of his main objective, the chemin des dames, would achieve a massive breakthrough and cost no more than , casualties. poor security meant german intelligence was well informed on tactics and timetables, but despite this, when the attack began on  april the french made substantial gains, before being brought to a halt by the newly built and extremely strong defences of the hindenburg line. nivelle persisted with frontal assaults and by  april the french had suffered nearly , casualties, including , dead, most incurred in the first two days.

concurrent british attacks at arras were more successful, although ultimately of little strategic value. operating as a separate unit for the first time, the canadian corps capture of vimy ridge during the battle is viewed by many canadians as a defining moment in creating a sense of national identity. although nivelle continued the offensive, on  may the st division, which had been involved in some of the heaviest fighting at verdun, refused orders to go into battle, initiating the french army mutinies; within days, acts of collective indiscipline had spread to  divisions, while over , deserted. unrest was almost entirely confined to the infantry, whose demands were largely nonpolitical, including better economic support for families at home, and regular periods of leave, which nivelle had ended.

in march and april , at the first and second battles of gaza, german and ottoman forces stopped the advance of the egyptian expeditionary force, which had begun in august  at the battle of romani. at the end of october, the sinai and palestine campaign resumed, when general edmund allenbys xxth corps, xxi corps and desert mounted corps won the battle of beersheba. two ottoman armies were defeated a few weeks later at the battle of mughar ridge and, early in december, jerusalem was captured following another ottoman defeat at the battle of jerusalem. about this time, friedrich freiherr kress von kressenstein was relieved of his duties as the eighth armys commander, replaced by djevad pasha, and a few months later the commander of the ottoman army in palestine, erich von falkenhayn, was replaced by otto liman von sanders.in early , the front line was extended and the jordan valley was occupied, following the first transjordan and the second transjordan attacks by british empire forces in march and april .

in december , the central powers signed an armistice with russia, thus freeing large numbers of german troops for use in the west. with german reinforcements and new american troops pouring in, the outcome was to be decided on the western front. the central powers knew that they could not win a protracted war, but they held high hopes for success based on a final quick offensive. ludendorff drew up plans  for the  offensive on the western front. the operation commenced on  march  with an attack on british forces near saintquentin. german forces achieved an unprecedented advance of  kilometres . the initial offensive a success; after heavy fighting, however, the offensive was halted. lacking tanks or motorised artillery, the germans were unable to consolidate their gains. the problems of resupply were also exacerbated by increasing distances that now stretched over terrain that was shelltorn and often impassable to traffic.following this, germany launched operation georgette against the northern english channel ports. the allies halted the drive after limited territorial gains by germany. the german army to the south then conducted operations blcher and yorck, pushing broadly towards paris. germany launched operation marne  on  july, in an attempt to encircle reims. the resulting counterattack, which started the hundred days offensive on  august, caused a marked collapse in german morale.

in september, the allies advanced to the hindenburg line in the north and centre. german forces launch numerous counterattacks, but positions and outposts of the line continued to fall, with the bef alone taking , prisoners in the last week of september. on  september, supreme army command informed the leaders in berlin that armistice talks were inevitable.the final assault on the hindenburg line began with the meuseargonne offensive, launched by american and french troops on  september. the following week, cooperating american and french units broke through in champagne at the battle of blanc mont ridge, forcing the germans off the commanding heights, and closing towards the belgian frontier. on  october the line was pierced again by british and dominion troops at the battle of cambrai.

allied forces started the vardar offensive on  september at two key points dobro pole and near dojran lake. in the battle of dobro pole, the serbian and french armies had success after a three day long battle with relatively small casualties, and subsequently made a breakthrough in the front, something which was rarely seen in world war i. after the front was broken, allied forces started to liberate serbia and reached skopje at  september, after which bulgaria signed an armistice with the allies on  september.

the collapse of the central powers came swiftly. bulgaria was the first to sign an armistice, the armistice of salonica on  september . german emperor wilhelm ii in a telegram to bulgarian tsar ferdinand i described the situation thus disgraceful , serbs decided the war. on the same day, the german supreme army command informed kaiser wilhelm ii and the imperial chancellor count georg von hertling, that the military situation facing germany was hopeless.on  october, the italians began a push that rapidly recovered territory lost after the battle of caporetto. this culminated in the battle of vittorio veneto, which marked the end of the austrohungarian army as an effective fighting force. the offensive also triggered the disintegration of the austrohungarian empire. during the last week of october, declarations of independence were made in budapest, prague, and zagreb. on  october, the imperial authorities asked italy for an armistice, but the italians continued advancing, reaching trento, udine, and trieste. on  november, austriahungary sent a flag of truce to ask for an armistice . the terms, arranged by telegraph with the allied authorities in paris, were communicated to the austrian commander and accepted. the armistice with austria was signed in the villa giusti, near padua, on  november. austria and hungary signed separate armistices following the overthrow of the habsburg monarchy. in the following days, the italian army occupied innsbruck and all tyrol with over , soldiers.on  october, the ottoman empire capitulated, signing the armistice of mudros.

with the military faltering and with widespread loss of confidence in the kaiser leading to his abdication and fleeing of the country, germany moved towards surrender. prince maximilian of baden took charge of a new government on  october as chancellor of germany to negotiate with the allies. negotiations with president wilson began immediately, in the hope that he would offer better terms than the british and french. wilson demanded a constitutional monarchy and parliamentary control over the german military.in northern germany, the german revolution of  began at the end of october . units of the german navy refused to set sail for a last, largescale operation in a war they believed to be as good as lost, initiating the uprising. the sailors revolt, which then ensued in the naval ports of wilhelmshaven and kiel, spread across the whole country within days and led to the proclamation of a republic on  november , shortly thereafter to the abdication of kaiser wilhelm ii, and to german surrender.

in the aftermath of the war, four empires disappeared the german, austrohungarian, ottoman, and russian. numerous nations regained their former independence, and new ones were created. four dynasties, together with their ancillary aristocracies, fell as a result of the war the romanovs, the hohenzollerns, the habsburgs, and the ottomans. belgium and serbia were badly damaged, as was france, with . million soldiers dead, not counting other casualties. germany and russia were similarly affected.

a formal state of war between the two sides persisted for another seven months, until the signing of the treaty of versailles with germany on  june . the united states senate did not ratify the treaty despite public support for it, and did not formally end its involvement in the war until the knoxporter resolution was signed on  july  by president warren g. harding. for the united kingdom and the british empire, the state of war ceased under the provisions of the termination of the present war  act  with respect to

germany on  january .

austria on  july .

bulgaria on  august .

hungary on  july .

turkey on  august .some war memorials date the end of the war as being when the versailles treaty was signed in , which was when many of the troops serving abroad finally returned home; by contrast, most commemorations of the wars end concentrate on the armistice of  november .

after the war, there grew a certain amount of academic focus on the causes of war and on the elements that could make peace flourish. in part, these led to the institutionalization of peace and conflict studies, security studies and international relations  in general. the paris peace conference imposed a series of peace treaties on the central powers officially ending the war. the  treaty of versailles dealt with germany and, building on wilsons th point, brought into being the league of nations on  june .the central powers had to acknowledge responsibility for all the loss and damage to which the allied and associated governments and their nationals have been subjected as a consequence of the war imposed upon them by their aggression. in the treaty of versailles, this statement was article . this article became known as the war guilt clause as the majority of germans felt humiliated and resentful. overall the germans felt they had been unjustly dealt with by what they called the diktat of versailles. german historian hagen schulze said the treaty placed germany under legal sanctions, deprived of military power, economically ruined, and politically humiliated. belgian historian laurence van ypersele emphasises the central role played by memory of the war and the versailles treaty in german politics in the s and s

active denial of war guilt in germany and german resentment at both reparations and continued allied occupation of the rhineland made widespread revision of the meaning and memory of the war problematic. the legend of the stab in the back and the wish to revise the versailles diktat, and the belief in an international threat aimed at the elimination of the german nation persisted at the heart of german politics. even a man of peace such as gustav stresemann publicly rejected german guilt. as for the nazis, they waved the banners of domestic treason and international conspiracy in an attempt to galvanise the german nation into a spirit of revenge. like a fascist italy, nazi germany sought to redirect the memory of the war to the benefit of its own policies.

meanwhile, new nations liberated from german rule viewed the treaty as recognition of wrongs committed against small nations by much larger aggressive neighbours.austriahungary was partitioned into several successor states, largely but not entirely along ethnic lines. apart from austria and hungary, czechoslovakia, italy, poland, romania and yugoslavia received territories from the dual monarchy . the details were contained in the saintgermainenlaye and the treaty of trianon. as a result, hungary lost  of its total population, decreasing from . million to . million and losing   of its ethnic hungarians. according to the  census, speakers of the hungarian language included approximately  of the entire population of the kingdom of hungary. within the country, numerous ethnic minorities were present . romanians, . slovaks, . germans, . ruthenians, . serbs and  others. between  and , , hungarians fled former hungarian territories attached to romania, czechoslovakia, and yugoslavia.the russian empire, which had withdrawn from the war in  after the october revolution, lost much of its western frontier as the newly independent nations of estonia, finland, latvia, lithuania, and poland were carved from it. romania took control of bessarabia in april .

after  years, poland reemerged as an independent country. the kingdom of serbia and its dynasty, as a minor entente nation and the country with the most casualties per capita, became the backbone of a new multinational state, the kingdom of serbs, croats and slovenes, later renamed yugoslavia. czechoslovakia, combining the kingdom of bohemia with parts of the kingdom of hungary, became a new nation. romania would unite all romanianspeaking people under a single state leading to greater romania.in the british empire, the war unleashed new forms of nationalism. in australia and new zealand, the battle of gallipoli became known as those nations baptism of fire. it was the first major war in which the newly established countries fought, and it was one of the first times that australian troops fought as australians, not just subjects of the british crown, and independent national identities for these nations took hold. anzac day, commemorating the australian and new zealand army corps , celebrates this defining moment.in the aftermath of world war i, greece fought against turkish nationalists led by mustafa kemal, a war that eventually resulted in a massive population exchange between the two countries under the treaty of lausanne. according to various sources, several hundred thousand greeks died during this period, which was tied in with the greek genocide.

of the  million european military personnel who were mobilised from  to ,  million were killed,  million were permanently disabled, and  million were seriously injured. germany lost . of its active male population, austriahungary lost ., and france lost .. france mobilised . million men, of which . million died and . million were injured. among the soldiers mutilated and surviving in the trenches, approximately , sustained horrific facial injuries, causing them to undergo social stigma and marginalisation; they were called the gueules casses. in germany, civilian deaths were , higher than in peacetime, due in large part to food shortages and malnutrition that weakened resistance to disease. these excess deaths are estimated as , in , plus another , in the first half of  when the blockade was still in effect. by the end of the war, starvation caused by famine had killed approximately , people in lebanon. between  and  million people died in the russian famine of . by , there were between . million and  million homeless children in russia as a result of nearly a decade of devastation from world war i, the russian civil war, and the subsequent famine of . numerous antisoviet russians fled the country after the revolution; by the s, the northern chinese city of harbin had , russians.

diseases flourished in the chaotic wartime conditions. in  alone, louseborne epidemic typhus killed , in serbia. from  to , russia had about  million infections and  million deaths from epidemic typhus. in ,  million russians contracted malaria, a sharp increase from the prewar years. starting in early , a major influenza epidemic known as spanish flu spread around the world, accelerated by the movement of large number of soldiers, often crammed together in camps and transport ships with poor sanitation. overall, the spanish flu killed at least  million to  million people, including an estimated . million europeans and as many as , americans. moreover, between  and , an epidemic of encephalitis lethargica spread around the world affecting nearly five million people.

the german army was the first to successfully deploy chemical weapons during the second battle of ypres , after german scientists working under the direction of fritz haber at the kaiser wilhelm institute developed a method to weaponize chlorine. the use of chemical weapons was sanctioned by the german high command in an effort to force allied soldiers out of their entrenched positions, complementing rather than supplanting more lethal conventional weapons. in time, chemical weapons were deployed by all major belligerents throughout the war, inflicting approximately . million casualties, but relatively few fatalities about , in total. for example, there were an estimated , british chemical weapons casualties during the war , and up to onethird of american casualties were caused by them. the russian army reportedly suffered roughly , chemical weapon casualties in world war i. the use of chemical weapons in warfare was in direct violation of the  hague declaration concerning asphyxiating gases and the  hague convention on land warfare, which prohibited their use.

the ethnic cleansing of the ottoman empires armenian population, including mass deportations and executions, during the final years of the ottoman empire is considered genocide. the ottomans carried out organised and systematic massacres of the armenian population at the beginning of the war and manipulated acts of armenian resistance by portraying them as rebellions to justify further extermination. in early , a number of armenians volunteered to join the russian forces and the ottoman government used this as a pretext to issue the tehcir law , which authorised the deportation of armenians from the empires eastern provinces to syria between  and . the armenians were intentionally marched to death and a number were attacked by ottoman brigands. while an exact number of deaths is unknown, the international association of genocide scholars estimates . million. the government of turkey has consistently denied the genocide, arguing that those who died were victims of interethnic fighting, famine, or disease during world war i; these claims are rejected by most historians.other ethnic groups were similarly attacked by the ottoman empire during this period, including assyrians and greeks, and some scholars consider those events to be part of the same policy of extermination. at least , assyrian christians, about half of the population, and ,, anatolian and pontic greeks were killed between  and .

allied personnel was around ,, while central personnel was near ,,. the british soldiers of the war were initially volunteers but increasingly were conscripted into service. surviving veterans, returning home, often found they could discuss their experiences only amongst themselves. grouping together, they formed veterans associations or legions. a small number of personal accounts of american veterans have been collected by the library of congress veterans history project.

about eight million soldiers surrendered and were held in pow camps during the war. all nations pledged to follow the hague conventions on fair treatment of prisoners of war, and the survival rate for pows was generally much higher than that of combatants at the front. of russian losses  were to prisoner status, for austriahungary , for italy , for france , for germany ; for britain . prisoners from the allied armies totalled about . million . from the central powers about . million soldiers became prisoners; most of them surrendered to russians.the most dangerous moment was the act of surrender when helpless soldiers were sometimes gunned down. once prisoners reached a camp, conditions were, in general, satisfactory , thanks in part to the efforts of the international red cross and inspections by neutral nations. however, conditions were terrible in russia. starvation was common for prisoners and civilians alike. about  of the prisoners in russia died, and in central powers imprisonment  of russians. in germany, food was scarce, but only  died.

the ottoman empire often treated pows poorly. some , british empire soldiers, most of them indians, became prisoners after the siege of kut in mesopotamia in april ; , died in captivity. although many were in a poor condition when captured, ottoman officers forced them to march , kilometres  to anatolia. a survivor said we were driven along like beasts; to drop out was to die. the survivors were then forced to build a railway through the taurus mountains.

while the allied prisoners of the central powers were quickly sent home at the end of active hostilities, the same treatment was not granted to central power prisoners of the allies and russia, many of whom served as forced labour, e.g., in france until . they were released only after many approaches by the red cross to the supreme war council. german prisoners were still being held in russia as late as .

military and civilian observers from every major power closely followed the course of the war. many were able to report on events from a perspective somewhat akin to modern embedded positions within the opposing land and naval forces.

conscription was common in most european countries. however, it was controversial in englishspeaking countries. it was especially unpopular among minority ethnic groupsespecially the irish catholics in ireland and australia, and the french catholics in canada.in the united states, conscription began in  and was generally well received, with a few pockets of opposition in isolated rural areas. the administration decided to rely primarily on conscription, rather than voluntary enlistment, to raise military manpower after only , volunteers enlisted out of the initial  million target in the first six weeks of the war.

macro and microeconomic consequences devolved from the war. families were altered by the departure of many men. with the death or absence of the primary wage earner, women were forced into the workforce in unprecedented numbers. at the same time, industry needed to replace the lost labourers sent to war. this aided the struggle for voting rights for women.in all nations, the governments share of gdp increased, surpassing  in both germany and france and nearly reaching that level in britain. to pay for purchases in the united states, britain cashed in its extensive investments in american railroads and then began borrowing heavily from wall street. president wilson was on the verge of cutting off the loans in late  but allowed a great increase in us government lending to the allies. after , the us demanded repayment of these loans. the repayments were, in part, funded by german reparations that, in turn, were supported by american loans to germany. this circular system collapsed in  and some loans were never repaid. britain still owed the united states . billion of world war i debt in ; the last installment was finally paid in .britain turned to her colonies for help in obtaining essential war materials whose supply from traditional sources had become difficult. geologists such as albert kitson were called on to find new resources of precious minerals in the african colonies. kitson discovered important new deposits of manganese, used in munitions production, in the gold coast.article  of the treaty of versailles  stated germany accepted responsibility for all the loss and damage to which the allied and associated governments and their nationals have been subjected as a consequence of the war imposed upon them by the aggression of germany and her allies. it was worded as such to lay a legal basis for reparations, and a similar clause was inserted in the treaties with austria and hungary. however, neither of them interpreted it as an admission of war guilt. in , the total reparation sum was placed at  billion gold marks. however, allied experts knew that germany could not pay this sum. the total sum was divided into three categories, with the third being deliberately designed to be chimerical and its primary function was to mislead public opinion ... into believing the total sum was being maintained. thus,  billion gold marks  represented the actual allied assessment of german capacity to pay and therefore  represented the total german reparations figure that had to be paid.this figure could be paid in cash or inkind . in addition, some of the territory lostvia the treaty of versailleswas credited towards the reparation figure as were other acts such as helping to restore the library of louvain. by , the great depression arrived, causing political chaos throughout the world. in  the payment of reparations was suspended by the international community, by which point germany had paid only the equivalent of . billion gold marks in reparations. with the rise of adolf hitler, all bonds and loans that had been issued and taken out during the s and early s were cancelled. david andelman notes refusing to pay doesnt make an agreement null and void. the bonds, the agreement, still exist. thus, following the second world war, at the london conference in , germany agreed to resume payment on the money borrowed. on  october , germany made the final payment on these bonds.the australian prime minister, billy hughes, wrote to the british prime minister, david lloyd george, you have assured us that you cannot get better terms. i much regret it, and hope even now that some way may be found of securing agreement for demanding reparation commensurate with the tremendous sacrifices made by the british empire and her allies. australia received ,, war reparations, but the direct cost of the war to australia had been ,,, and, by the mids, repatriation pensions, war gratuities, interest and sinking fund charges were ,,. of about , australians who served, about , were killed and another , were wounded.the war contributed to the evolution of the wristwatch from womens jewellery to a practical everyday item, replacing the pocketwatch, which requires a free hand to operate. trench watches were designed for use by the military as pocket watches were not as effective for combat. military funding of advancements in radio contributed to the postwar popularity of the medium.

in the balkans, yugoslav nationalists such as the leader, ante trumbi, strongly supported the war, desiring the freedom of yugoslavs from austriahungary and other foreign powers and the creation of an independent yugoslavia. the yugoslav committee, led by trumbi, was formed in paris on  april  but shortly moved its office to london. in april , the rome congress of oppressed nationalities met, including czechoslovak, italian, polish, transylvanian, and yugoslav representatives who urged the allies to support national selfdetermination for the peoples residing within austriahungary.in the middle east, arab nationalism soared in ottoman territories in response to the rise of turkish nationalism during the war, with arab nationalist leaders advocating the creation of a panarab state. in , the arab revolt began in ottomancontrolled territories of the middle east in an effort to achieve independence.in east africa, iyasu v of ethiopia was supporting the dervish state who were at war with the british in the somaliland campaign. von syburg, the german envoy in addis ababa, said, now the time has come for ethiopia to regain the coast of the red sea driving the italians home, to restore the empire to its ancient size. the ethiopian empire was on the verge of entering world war i on the side of the central powers before iyasus overthrow at the battle of segale due to allied pressure on the ethiopian aristocracy. iyasu was accused of converting to islam. according to ethiopian historian bahru zewde, the evidence used to prove iyasus conversion was a doctored photo of iyasu wearing a turban provided by the allies. some historians claim the british spy t. e. lawrence forged the iyasu photo.

a number of socialist parties initially supported the war when it began in august . but european socialists split on national lines, with the concept of class conflict held by radical socialists such as marxists and syndicalists being overborne by their patriotic support for the war. once the war began, austrian, british, french, german, and russian socialists followed the rising nationalist current by supporting their countries intervention in the war.italian nationalism was stirred by the outbreak of the war and was initially strongly supported by a variety of political factions. one of the most prominent and popular italian nationalist supporters of the war was gabriele dannunzio, who promoted italian irredentism and helped sway the italian public to support intervention in the war. the italian liberal party, under the leadership of paolo boselli, promoted intervention in the war on the side of the allies and used the dante alighieri society to promote italian nationalism. italian socialists were divided on whether to support the war or oppose it; some were militant supporters of the war, including benito mussolini and leonida bissolati. however, the italian socialist party decided to oppose the war after antimilitarist protestors were killed, resulting in a general strike called red week. the italian socialist party purged itself of prowar nationalist members, including mussolini. mussolini, a syndicalist who supported the war on grounds of irredentist claims on italianpopulated regions of austriahungary, formed the prointerventionist il popolo ditalia and the fasci rivoluzionario dazione internazionalista  in october  that later developed into the fasci italiani di combattimento in , the origin of fascism. mussolinis nationalism enabled him to raise funds from ansaldo  and other companies to create il popolo ditalia to convince socialists and revolutionaries to support the war.

on both sides there was large scale fundraising for soldiers welfare, their dependents and for those injured. the nail men were a german example. around the british empire there were many patriotic funds, including the royal patriotic fund corporation, canadian patriotic fund, queensland patriotic fund and, by , there were  funds in new zealand. at the start of the next world war the new zealand funds were reformed, having been criticised as overlapping, wasteful and abused, but  were still functioning in .

many countries jailed those who spoke out against the conflict. these included eugene debs in the united states and bertrand russell in britain. in the us, the espionage act of  and sedition act of  made it a federal crime to oppose military recruitment or make any statements deemed disloyal. publications at all critical of the government were removed from circulation by postal censors, and many served long prison sentences for statements of fact deemed unpatriotic.a number of nationalists opposed intervention, particularly within states that the nationalists were hostile to. although the vast majority of irish people consented to participate in the war in  and , a minority of advanced irish nationalists staunchly opposed taking part. the war began amid the home rule crisis in ireland that had resurfaced in , and by july  there was a serious possibility of an outbreak of civil war in ireland. irish nationalists and marxists attempted to pursue irish independence, culminating in the easter rising of , with germany sending , rifles to ireland to stir unrest in britain. the uk government placed ireland under martial law in response to the easter rising, though once the immediate threat of revolution had dissipated, the authorities did try to make concessions to nationalist feeling. however, opposition to involvement in the war increased in ireland, resulting in the conscription crisis of .

other opposition came from conscientious objectorssome socialist, some religiouswho refused to fight. in britain, , people asked for conscientious objector status. some of them, most notably prominent peace activist stephen hobhouse, refused both military and alternative service. many suffered years of prison, including solitary confinement and bread and water diets. even after the war, in britain many job advertisements were marked no conscientious objectors need apply.on  may , about , workers and soldiers of petrograd, and after them, the workers and soldiers of other russian cities, led by the bolsheviks, demonstrated under banners reading down with the war and all power to the soviets the mass demonstrations resulted in a crisis for the russian provisional government. in milan, in may , bolshevik revolutionaries organised and engaged in rioting calling for an end to the war, and managed to close down factories and stop public transportation. the italian army was forced to enter milan with tanks and machine guns to face bolsheviks and anarchists, who fought violently until  may when the army gained control of the city. almost  people  were killed and over  people arrested.

world war i began as a clash of thcentury technology and thcentury tactics, with the inevitably large ensuing casualties. by the end of , however, the major armies, now numbering millions of men, had modernised and were making use of telephone, wireless communication, armoured cars, tanks , and aircraft.artillery also underwent a revolution. in , cannons were positioned in the front line and fired directly at their targets. by , indirect fire with guns  was commonplace, using new techniques for spotting and ranging, notably, aircraft and the often overlooked field telephone.fixedwing aircraft were initially used for reconnaissance and ground attack. to shoot down enemy planes, antiaircraft guns and fighter aircraft were developed. strategic bombers were created, principally by the germans and british, though the former used zeppelins as well. towards the end of the conflict, aircraft carriers were used for the first time, with hms furious launching sopwith camels in a raid to destroy the zeppelin hangars at tnder in .

the nonmilitary diplomatic and propaganda interactions among the nations were designed to build support for the cause or to undermine support for the enemy. for the most part, wartime diplomacy focused on five issues propaganda campaigns; defining and redefining the war goals, which became harsher as the war went on; luring neutral nations  into the coalition by offering slices of enemy territory; and encouragement by the allies of nationalistic minority movements inside the central powers, especially among czechs, poles, and arabs. in addition, there were multiple peace proposals coming from neutrals, or one side or the other; none of them progressed very far.

as late as , signs warning visitors to keep off certain paths at battlefield sites like verdun and somme remained in place as unexploded ordnance continued to pose a danger to farmers living near former battlegrounds. in france and belgium locals who discover caches of unexploded munitions are assisted by weapons disposal units. in some places, plant life has still not returned to normal.

 the first tentative efforts to comprehend the meaning and consequences of modern warfare began during the initial phases of the war; this process continued throughout and after the end of hostilities, and is still underway more than a century later. teaching world war i has presented special challenges. when compared with world war ii, the first world war is often thought to be a wrong war fought for the wrong reasons. it lacks the metanarrative of good versus evil that characterizes the second world war. lacking recognizable heroes and villains, it is often taught thematically, invoking tropes like the wastefulness of war, the folly of generals and the innocence of soldiers. the complexity of the conflict is mostly obscured by these oversimplifications. george kennan referred to the war as the seminal catastrophe of the th century.historian heather jones argues that the historiography has been reinvigorated by the cultural turn in recent years. scholars have raised entirely new questions regarding military occupation, radicalisation of politics, race, medical science, gender and mental health. furthermore, new research has revised our understanding of five major topics that historians have long debated why the war began, why the allies won, whether generals were responsible for high casualty rates, how the soldiers endured the horrors of trench warfare, and to what extent the civilian homefront accepted and endorsed the war effort.

memorials were erected in thousands of villages and towns. close to battlefields, those buried in improvised burial grounds were gradually moved to formal graveyards under the care of organisations such as the commonwealth war graves commission, the american battle monuments commission, the german war graves commission, and le souvenir franais. many of these graveyards also have central monuments to the missing or unidentified dead, such as the menin gate memorial to the missing and the thiepval memorial to the missing of the somme.in , john mccrae, a canadian army doctor, wrote the poem in flanders fields as a salute to those who perished in the great war. published in punch on  december , it is still recited today, especially on remembrance day and memorial day.

national world war i museum and memorial in kansas city, missouri, is a memorial dedicated to all americans who served in world war i. the liberty memorial was dedicated on  november , when the supreme allied commanders spoke to a crowd of more than , people.the uk government has budgeted substantial resources to the commemoration of the war during the period  to . the lead body is the imperial war museum. on  august , french president franois hollande and german president joachim gauck together marked the centenary of germanys declaration of war on france by laying the first stone of a memorial in vieil armand, known in german as hartmannswillerkopf, for french and german soldiers killed in the war. during the armistice centenary commemorations, french president emmanuel macron and german chancellor angela merkel visited the site of the signing of the armistice of compigne and unveiled a plaque to reconciliation.

world war i had a lasting impact on collective memory. it was seen by many in britain as signalling the end of an era of stability stretching back to the victorian period, and across europe many regarded it as a watershed. historian samuel hynes explained

a generation of innocent young men, their heads full of high abstractions like honour, glory and england, went off to war to make the world safe for democracy. they were slaughtered in stupid battles planned by stupid generals. those who survived were shocked, disillusioned and embittered by their war experiences, and saw that their real enemies were not the germans, but the old men at home who had lied to them. they rejected the values of the society that had sent them to war, and in doing so separated their own generation from the past and from their cultural inheritance.

this has become the most common perception of world war i, perpetuated by the art, cinema, poems, and stories published subsequently. films such as all quiet on the western front, paths of glory and king and country have perpetuated the idea, while wartime films including camrades, poppies of flanders, and shoulder arms indicate that the most contemporary views of the war were overall far more positive. likewise, the art of paul nash, john nash, christopher nevinson, and henry tonks in britain painted a negative view of the conflict in keeping with the growing perception, while popular wartime artists such as muirhead bone painted more serene and pleasant interpretations subsequently rejected as inaccurate. several historians like john terraine, niall ferguson and gary sheffield have challenged these interpretations as partial and polemical views

these beliefs did not become widely shared because they offered the only accurate interpretation of wartime events. in every respect, the war was much more complicated than they suggest. in recent years, historians have argued persuasively against almost every popular clich of world war i. it has been pointed out that, although the losses were devastating, their greatest impact was socially and geographically limited. the many emotions other than horror experienced by soldiers in and out of the front line, including comradeship, boredom, and even enjoyment, have been recognised. the war is not now seen as a fight about nothing, but as a war of ideals, a struggle between aggressive militarism and more or less liberal democracy. it has been acknowledged that british generals were often capable men facing difficult challenges and that it was under their command that the british army played a major part in the defeat of the germans in  a great forgotten victory.

though these views have been discounted as myths, they are common. they have dynamically changed according to contemporary influences, reflecting in the s perceptions of the war as aimless following the contrasting second world war and emphasising conflict within the ranks during times of class conflict in the s. the majority of additions to the contrary are often rejected.writers such as ernest hemingway wrote many stories on the experiences of veterans after the war, such as the short story soldiers home, about young veteran harold krebs trying to integrate back into society.

the social trauma caused by unprecedented rates of casualties manifested itself in different ways, which have been the subject of subsequent historical debate. over  million europeans died in the war. millions suffered permanent disabilities. the war gave birth to fascism and bolshevism and destroyed the dynasties that had ruled the ottoman, habsburg, russian and german empires.the optimism of la belle poque was destroyed, and those who had fought in the war were referred to as the lost generation. for years afterward, people mourned the dead, the missing, and the many disabled. many soldiers returned with severe trauma, suffering from shell shock . many more returned home with few aftereffects; however, their silence about the war contributed to the conflicts growing mythological status. though many participants did not share in the experiences of combat or spend any significant time at the front, or had positive memories of their service, the images of suffering and trauma became the widely shared perception. such historians as dan todman, paul fussell, and samuel heyns have all published works since the s arguing that these common perceptions of the war are factually incorrect.

the rise of nazism and fascism included a revival of the nationalist spirit and a rejection of many postwar changes. similarly, the popularity of the stabintheback legend  was a testament to the psychological state of defeated germany and was a rejection of responsibility for the conflict. this conspiracy theory of the betrayal of the german war effort by jews became common, and the german populace came to see themselves as victims. the widespread acceptance of the stabintheback theory delegitimised the weimar government and destabilised the system, opening it to extremes of right and left. the same occurred in austria which did not consider itself responsible for the outbreak of the war and claimed not to have suffered a military defeat.communist and fascist movements around europe drew strength from this theory and enjoyed a new level of popularity. these feelings were most pronounced in areas directly or harshly affected by the war. adolf hitler was able to gain popularity by using german discontent with the still controversial treaty of versailles. world war ii was in part a continuation of the power struggle never fully resolved by world war i. furthermore, it was common for germans in the s to justify acts of aggression due to perceived injustices imposed by the victors of world war i. american historian william rubinstein wrote that

the age of totalitarianism included nearly all the infamous examples of genocide in modern history, headed by the jewish holocaust, but also comprising the mass murders and purges of the communist world, other mass killings carried out by nazi germany and its allies, and also the armenian genocide of . all these slaughters, it is argued here, had a common origin, the collapse of the elite structure and normal modes of government of much of central, eastern and southern europe as a result of world war i, without which surely neither communism nor fascism would have existed except in the minds of unknown agitators and crackpots.

world war ii  or the second world war was a global conflict that lasted from  to .

the vast majority of the worlds countries, including all the great powers, fought as part of two opposing military alliances the allies and the axis. many participants threw their economic, industrial, and scientific capabilities behind this total war, blurring the distinction between civilian and military resources. aircraft played a major role, enabling the strategic bombing of population centres and delivery of the only two nuclear weapons ever used in war. it was by far the deadliest conflict in history, resulting in  to  million fatalities, mostly civilians. millions died due to genocides, including the holocaust, as well as starvation, massacres, and disease. in the wake of axis defeat, germany, austria and japan were occupied, and war crimes tribunals were conducted against german and japanese leaders.

the causes of the war are debated; contributing factors included the rise of fascism in europe, the spanish civil war, the second sinojapanese war, sovietjapanese border conflicts, and tensions in the aftermath of world war i. world war ii is generally considered to have begun on  september , when nazi germany, under adolf hitler, invaded poland. the united kingdom and france declared war on germany on  september. under the molotovribbentrop pact of august , germany and the soviet union had partitioned poland and marked out their spheres of influence across finland, estonia, latvia, lithuania and romania. from late  to early , in a series of campaigns and treaties, germany conquered or controlled much of continental europe, in a military alliance, called the axis, with italy, japan, and other countries. following the onset of campaigns in north africa and east africa, and the fall of france in mid, the war continued primarily between the european axis powers and british empire, with the war in the balkans, the aerial battle of britain, the blitz of the uk, and the battle of the atlantic. in june , germany led the european axis powers in an invasion of the soviet union, opening the eastern front, the largest land theatre of war in history.

japan, which aimed to dominate asia and the pacific, was at war with the republic of china by . in december , japan attacked american and british territories with nearsimultaneous offensives against southeast asia and the central pacific, including an attack on pearl harbor which resulted in the united states and the united kingdom declaring war against japan. the european axis powers declared war on the us in solidarity. japan soon conquered much of the western pacific, but its advances were halted in  after losing the critical battle of midway; germany and italy were defeated in north africa and at stalingrad in the soviet union. key setbacks in including german defeats on the eastern front, the allied invasions of sicily and italian mainland, and allied offensives in the pacificcost the axis powers their initiative and forced them into strategic retreat on all fronts. in , the western allies invaded germanoccupied france, while the soviet union regained its territorial losses and pushed germany and its allies back. during , japan suffered reversals in mainland asia, while the allies crippled the japanese navy and captured key western pacific islands. the war in europe concluded with the liberation of germanoccupied territories and the invasion of germany by the western allies and the soviet union, culminating in the fall of berlin to soviet troops, hitlers suicide, and the german unconditional surrender on  may . following the refusal of japan to surrender on the terms of the potsdam declaration, the us dropped the first atomic bombs on hiroshima on  august and nagasaki on  august. faced with imminent invasion of the japanese archipelago, the possibility of more atomic bombings, and the soviet unions declared entry into the war against japan on the eve of invading manchuria, japan announced on  august its intention to surrender, signing a surrender document on  september .

world war ii changed the political alignment and social structure of the world, and set the foundation for the international order for the rest of the th century and into the present. the united nations was established to foster international cooperation and prevent conflicts, with the victorious great powerschina, france, the soviet union, the uk, and the usbecoming the permanent members of its security council. the soviet union and the us emerged as rival superpowers, setting the stage for the nearly halfcenturylong cold war. in the wake of european devastation, the influence of its great powers waned, triggering the decolonization of africa and asia. most countries whose industries had been damaged moved towards economic recovery and expansion.

it is generally considered that, in europe, world war ii started on  september , beginning with the german invasion of poland and the united kingdom and frances declaration of war on germany two days later on  september . dates for the beginning of the pacific war include the start of the second sinojapanese war on  july , or the earlier japanese invasion of manchuria, on  september . others follow the british historian a. j. p. taylor, who held that the sinojapanese war and war in europe and its colonies occurred simultaneously, and the two wars became world war ii in . other starting dates sometimes used for world war ii include the italian invasion of abyssinia on  october . the british historian antony beevor views the beginning of world war ii as the battles of khalkhin gol fought between japan and the forces of mongolia and the soviet union from may to september . others view the spanish civil war as the start or prelude to world war ii.the exact date of the wars end is also not universally agreed upon. it was generally accepted at the time that the war ended with the armistice of  august  , rather than with the formal surrender of japan on  september , which officially ended the war in asia. a peace treaty between japan and the allies was signed in . a  treaty regarding germanys future allowed the reunification of east and west germany to take place and resolved most postworld war ii issues. no formal peace treaty between japan and the soviet union was ever signed, although the state of war between the two countries was terminated by the sovietjapanese joint declaration of , which also restored full diplomatic relations between them.

world war i had radically altered the political european map with the defeat of the central powersincluding austriahungary, germany, bulgaria, and the ottoman empireand the  bolshevik seizure of power in russia, which led to the founding of the soviet union. meanwhile, the victorious allies of world war i, such as france, belgium, italy, romania, and greece, gained territory, and new nationstates were created out of the collapse of austriahungary and the ottoman and russian empires.to prevent a future world war, the league of nations was created during the  paris peace conference. the organisations primary goals were to prevent armed conflict through collective security, military and naval disarmament, and settling international disputes through peaceful negotiations and arbitration.despite strong pacifist sentiment after world war i, irredentist and revanchist nationalism emerged in several european states in the same period. these sentiments were especially marked in germany because of the significant territorial, colonial, and financial losses imposed by the treaty of versailles. under the treaty, germany lost around  percent of its home territory and all its overseas possessions, while german annexation of other states was prohibited, reparations were imposed, and limits were placed on the size and capability of the countrys armed forces.

the german empire was dissolved in the german revolution of , and a democratic government, later known as the weimar republic, was created. the interwar period saw strife between supporters of the new republic and hardline opponents on both the right and left. italy, as an entente ally, had made some postwar territorial gains; however, italian nationalists were angered that the promises made by the united kingdom and france to secure italian entrance into the war were not fulfilled in the peace settlement. from  to , the fascist movement led by benito mussolini seized power in italy with a nationalist, totalitarian, and class collaborationist agenda that abolished representative democracy, repressed socialist, leftwing and liberal forces, and pursued an aggressive expansionist foreign policy aimed at making italy a world power, and promising the creation of a new roman empire.

adolf hitler, after an unsuccessful attempt to overthrow the german government in , eventually became the chancellor of germany in  when paul von hindenburg and the reichstag appointed him. following hindenburgs death in , hitler proclaimed himself fhrer of germany and abolished democracy, espousing a radical, racially motivated revision of the world order, and soon began a massive rearmament campaign. meanwhile, france, to secure its alliance, allowed italy a free hand in ethiopia, which italy desired as a colonial possession. the situation was aggravated in early  when the territory of the saar basin was legally reunited with germany, and hitler repudiated the treaty of versailles, accelerated his rearmament programme, and introduced conscription.

the united kingdom, france and italy formed the stresa front in april  in order to contain germany, a key step towards military globalisation; however, that june, the united kingdom made an independent naval agreement with germany, easing prior restrictions. the soviet union, concerned by germanys goals of capturing vast areas of eastern europe, drafted a treaty of mutual assistance with france. before taking effect, though, the francosoviet pact was required to go through the bureaucracy of the league of nations, which rendered it essentially toothless. the united states, concerned with events in europe and asia, passed the neutrality act in august of the same year.hitler defied the versailles and locarno treaties by remilitarising the rhineland in march , encountering little opposition due to the policy of appeasement. in october , germany and italy formed the romeberlin axis. a month later, germany and japan signed the anticomintern pact, which italy joined the following year.

the kuomintang  party in china launched a unification campaign against regional warlords and nominally unified china in the mids, but was soon embroiled in a civil war against its former chinese communist party allies and new regional warlords. in , an increasingly militaristic empire of japan, which had long sought influence in china as the first step of what its government saw as the countrys right to rule asia, staged the mukden incident as a pretext to invade manchuria and establish the puppet state of manchukuo.china appealed to the league of nations to stop the japanese invasion of manchuria. japan withdrew from the league of nations after being condemned for its incursion into manchuria. the two nations then fought several battles, in shanghai, rehe and hebei, until the tanggu truce was signed in . thereafter, chinese volunteer forces continued the resistance to japanese aggression in manchuria, and chahar and suiyuan. after the  xian incident, the kuomintang and communist forces agreed on a ceasefire to present a united front to oppose japan.

the second italoethiopian war was a brief colonial war that began in october  and ended in may . the war began with the invasion of the ethiopian empire  by the armed forces of the kingdom of italy , which was launched from italian somaliland and eritrea. the war resulted in the military occupation of ethiopia and its annexation into the newly created colony of italian east africa ; in addition it exposed the weakness of the league of nations as a force to preserve peace. both italy and ethiopia were member nations, but the league did little when the former clearly violated article x of the leagues covenant. the united kingdom and france supported imposing sanctions on italy for the invasion, but the sanctions were not fully enforced and failed to end the italian invasion. italy subsequently dropped its objections to germanys goal of absorbing austria.

when civil war broke out in spain, hitler and mussolini lent military support to the nationalist rebels, led by general francisco franco. italy supported the nationalists to a greater extent than the nazis did altogether mussolini sent to spain more than , ground troops and , aviation personnel, as well as about  aircraft. the soviet union supported the existing government of the spanish republic. more than , foreign volunteers, known as the international brigades, also fought against the nationalists. both germany and the soviet union used this proxy war as an opportunity to test in combat their most advanced weapons and tactics. the nationalists won the civil war in april ; franco, now dictator, remained officially neutral during world war ii but generally favoured the axis. his greatest collaboration with germany was the sending of volunteers to fight on the eastern front.

in july , japan captured the former chinese imperial capital of peking after instigating the marco polo bridge incident, which culminated in the japanese campaign to invade all of china. the soviets quickly signed a nonaggression pact with china to lend materiel support, effectively ending chinas prior cooperation with germany. from september to november, the japanese attacked taiyuan, engaged the kuomintang army around xinkou, and fought communist forces in pingxingguan. generalissimo chiang kaishek deployed his best army to defend shanghai, but after three months of fighting, shanghai fell. the japanese continued to push the chinese forces back, capturing the capital nanking in december . after the fall of nanking, tens or hundreds of thousands of chinese civilians and disarmed combatants were murdered by the japanese.in march , nationalist chinese forces won their first major victory at taierzhuang, but then the city of xuzhou was taken by the japanese in may. in june , chinese forces stalled the japanese advance by flooding the yellow river; this manoeuvre bought time for the chinese to prepare their defences at wuhan, but the city was taken by october. japanese military victories did not bring about the collapse of chinese resistance that japan had hoped to achieve; instead, the chinese government relocated inland to chongqing and continued the war.

in the midtolate s, japanese forces in manchukuo had sporadic border clashes with the soviet union and mongolia. the japanese doctrine of hokushinron, which emphasised japans expansion northward, was favoured by the imperial army during this time. with the japanese defeat at khalkin gol in , the ongoing second sinojapanese war and ally nazi germany pursuing neutrality with the soviets, this policy would prove difficult to maintain. japan and the soviet union eventually signed a neutrality pact in april , and japan adopted the doctrine of nanshinron, promoted by the navy, which took its focus southward, eventually leading to its war with the united states and the western allies.

in europe, germany and italy were becoming more aggressive. in march , germany annexed austria, again provoking little response from other european powers. encouraged, hitler began pressing german claims on the sudetenland, an area of czechoslovakia with a predominantly ethnic german population. soon the united kingdom and france followed the appeasement policy of british prime minister neville chamberlain and conceded this territory to germany in the munich agreement, which was made against the wishes of the czechoslovak government, in exchange for a promise of no further territorial demands. soon afterwards, germany and italy forced czechoslovakia to cede additional territory to hungary, and poland annexed the transolza region of czechoslovakia.although all of germanys stated demands had been satisfied by the agreement, privately hitler was furious that british interference had prevented him from seizing all of czechoslovakia in one operation. in subsequent speeches hitler attacked british and jewish warmongers and in january  secretly ordered a major buildup of the german navy to challenge british naval supremacy. in march , germany invaded the remainder of czechoslovakia and subsequently split it into the german protectorate of bohemia and moravia and a progerman client state, the slovak republic. hitler also delivered an ultimatum to lithuania on  march , forcing the concession of the klaipda region, formerly the german memelland.greatly alarmed and with hitler making further demands on the free city of danzig, the united kingdom and france guaranteed their support for polish independence; when italy conquered albania in april , the same guarantee was extended to the kingdoms of romania and greece. shortly after the francobritish pledge to poland, germany and italy formalised their own alliance with the pact of steel. hitler accused the united kingdom and poland of trying to encircle germany and renounced the anglogerman naval agreement and the germanpolish nonaggression pact.the situation reached a general crisis in late august as german troops continued to mobilise against the polish border. on  august, when tripartite negotiations about a military alliance between france, the united kingdom and soviet union stalled, the soviet union signed a nonaggression pact with germany. this pact had a secret protocol that defined german and soviet spheres of influence , and raised the question of continuing polish independence. the pact neutralised the possibility of soviet opposition to a campaign against poland and assured that germany would not have to face the prospect of a twofront war, as it had in world war i. immediately after that, hitler ordered the attack to proceed on  august, but upon hearing that the united kingdom had concluded a formal mutual assistance pact with poland and that italy would maintain neutrality, he decided to delay it.in response to british requests for direct negotiations to avoid war, germany made demands on poland, which only served as a pretext to worsen relations. on  august, hitler demanded that a polish plenipotentiary immediately travel to berlin to negotiate the handover of danzig, and to allow a plebiscite in the polish corridor in which the german minority would vote on secession. the poles refused to comply with the german demands, and on the night of  august in a confrontational meeting with the british ambassador nevile henderson, ribbentrop declared that germany considered its claims rejected.

on  september , germany invaded poland after having staged several false flag border incidents as a pretext to initiate the invasion. the first german attack of the war came against the polish defenses at westerplatte. the united kingdom responded with an ultimatum to germany to cease military operations, and on  september, after the ultimatum was ignored, britain and france declared war on germany, followed by australia, new zealand, south africa, and canada. during the phoney war period, the alliance provided no direct military support to poland, outside of a cautious french probe into the saarland. the western allies also began a naval blockade of germany, which aimed to damage the countrys economy and the war effort. germany responded by ordering uboat warfare against allied merchant and warships, which would later escalate into the battle of the atlantic.on  september, german troops reached the suburbs of warsaw. the polish counteroffensive to the west halted the german advance for several days, but it was outflanked and encircled by the wehrmacht. remnants of the polish army broke through to besieged warsaw. on  september , two days after signing a ceasefire with japan, the soviet union invaded poland under the pretext that the polish state had ostensibly ceased to exist. on  september, the warsaw garrison surrendered to the germans, and the last large operational unit of the polish army surrendered on  october. despite the military defeat, poland never surrendered; instead, it formed the polish governmentinexile and a clandestine state apparatus remained in occupied poland. a significant part of polish military personnel evacuated to romania and latvia; many of them later fought against the axis in other theatres of the war.germany annexed the western and occupied the central part of poland, and the soviet union annexed its eastern part; small shares of polish territory were transferred to lithuania and slovakia. on  october, hitler made a public peace overture to the united kingdom and france but said that the future of poland was to be determined exclusively by germany and the soviet union. the proposal was rejected, and hitler ordered an immediate offensive against france, which was postponed until the spring of  due to bad weather.

after the outbreak of war in poland, stalin threatened estonia, latvia, and lithuania with military invasion, forcing the three baltic countries to sign pacts that stipulated the creation of soviet military bases in these countries. in october , significant soviet military contingents were moved there. finland refused to sign a similar pact and rejected ceding part of its territory to the soviet union. the soviet union invaded finland in november , and was subsequently expelled from the league of nations for this crime of aggression. despite overwhelming numerical superiority, soviet military success during the winter war was modest, and the finnosoviet war ended in march  with some finnish concessions of territory.in june , the soviet union occupied the entire territories of estonia, latvia and lithuania, and the romanian regions of bessarabia, northern bukovina, and the hertsa region. in august , hitler imposed the second vienna award on romania which led to the transfer of northern transylvania to hungary. in september , bulgaria demanded southern dobruja from romania with german and italian support, leading to the treaty of craiova. the loss of onethird of romanias  territory caused a coup against king carol ii, turning romania into a fascist dictatorship under marshal ion antonescu with a course set firmly towards the axis in the hopes of a german guarantee. meanwhile, germansoviet political rapprochement and economic cooperation gradually stalled, and both states began preparations for war.

in april , germany invaded denmark and norway to protect shipments of iron ore from sweden, which the allies were attempting to cut off. denmark capitulated after six hours, and norway was conquered within two months despite allied support. british discontent over the norwegian campaign led to the resignation of prime minister neville chamberlain, who was replaced by winston churchill on  may .on the same day, germany launched an offensive against france. to circumvent the strong maginot line fortifications on the francogerman border, germany directed its attack at the neutral nations of belgium, the netherlands, and luxembourg. the germans carried out a flanking manoeuvre through the ardennes region, which was mistakenly perceived by the allies as an impenetrable natural barrier against armoured vehicles. by successfully implementing new blitzkrieg tactics, the wehrmacht rapidly advanced to the channel and cut off the allied forces in belgium, trapping the bulk of the allied armies in a cauldron on the francobelgian border near lille. the united kingdom was able to evacuate a significant number of allied troops from the continent by early june, although abandoning almost all their equipment.on  june, italy invaded france, declaring war on both france and the united kingdom. the germans turned south against the weakened french army, and paris fell to them on  june. eight days later france signed an armistice with germany; it was divided into german and italian occupation zones, and an unoccupied rump state under the vichy regime, which, though officially neutral, was generally aligned with germany. france kept its fleet, which the united kingdom attacked on  july in an attempt to prevent its seizure by germany.

the air battle of britain began in early july with luftwaffe attacks on shipping and harbours. the united kingdom rejected hitlers peace offer, and the german air superiority campaign started in august but failed to defeat raf fighter command, forcing the indefinite postponement of the proposed german invasion of britain. the german strategic bombing offensive intensified with night attacks on london and other cities in the blitz, but failed to significantly disrupt the british war effort and largely ended in may .using newly captured french ports, the german navy enjoyed success against an overextended royal navy, using uboats against british shipping in the atlantic. the british home fleet scored a significant victory on  may  by sinking the german battleship bismarck.in november , the united states was taking measures to assist china and the western allies and amended the neutrality act to allow cash and carry purchases by the allies. in , following the german capture of paris, the size of the united states navy was significantly increased. in september the united states further agreed to a trade of american destroyers for british bases. still, a large majority of the american public continued to oppose any direct military intervention in the conflict well into . in december , roosevelt accused hitler of planning world conquest and ruled out any negotiations as useless, calling for the united states to become an arsenal of democracy and promoting lendlease programmes of military and humanitarian aid to support the british war effort, which was later extended to the other allies, including the soviet union after it was invaded by germany. the united states started strategic planning to prepare for a fullscale offensive against germany.at the end of september , the tripartite pact formally united japan, italy, and germany as the axis powers. the tripartite pact stipulated that any country, with the exception of the soviet union, which attacked any axis power would be forced to go to war against all three. the axis expanded in november  when hungary, slovakia, and romania joined. romania and hungary later made major contributions to the axis war against the soviet union, in romanias case partially to recapture territory ceded to the soviet union.

in early june , the italian regia aeronautica attacked and besieged malta, a british possession. from late summer to early autumn, italy conquered british somaliland and made an incursion into britishheld egypt. in october, italy attacked greece, but the attack was repulsed with heavy italian casualties; the campaign ended within months with minor territorial changes. germany started preparation for an invasion of the balkans to assist italy, to prevent the british from gaining a foothold there, which would be a potential threat for romanian oil fields, and to strike against the british dominance of the mediterranean.

in december , british empire forces began counteroffensives against italian forces in egypt and italian east africa. the offensives were highly successful; by early february , italy had lost control of eastern libya, and large numbers of italian troops had been taken prisoner. the italian navy also suffered significant defeats, with the royal navy putting three italian battleships out of commission by means of a carrier attack at taranto, and neutralising several more warships at the battle of cape matapan.italian defeats prompted germany to deploy an expeditionary force to north africa and at the end of march , rommels afrika korps launched an offensive which drove back the commonwealth forces. in under a month, axis forces advanced to western egypt and besieged the port of tobruk.by late march , bulgaria and yugoslavia signed the tripartite pact; however, the yugoslav government was overthrown two days later by probritish nationalists. germany and italy responded with simultaneous invasions of both yugoslavia and greece, commencing on  april ; both nations were forced to surrender within the month. the airborne invasion of the greek island of crete at the end of may completed the german conquest of the balkans. although the axis victory was swift, bitter and largescale partisan warfare subsequently broke out against the axis occupation of yugoslavia, which continued until the end of the war.in the middle east in may, commonwealth forces quashed an uprising in iraq which had been supported by german aircraft from bases within vichycontrolled syria. between june and july, britishled forces invaded and occupied the french possessions of syria and lebanon, assisted by the free french.

with the situation in europe and asia relatively stable, germany, japan, and the soviet union made preparations for war. with the soviets wary of mounting tensions with germany and the japanese planning to take advantage of the european war by seizing resourcerich european possessions in southeast asia, the two powers signed the sovietjapanese neutrality pact in april . by contrast, the germans were steadily making preparations for an attack on the soviet union, massing forces on the soviet border.hitler believed that the united kingdoms refusal to end the war was based on the hope that the united states and the soviet union would enter the war against germany sooner or later. on  july , hitler decided that the soviet union should be eliminated and aimed for the conquest of ukraine, the baltic states and byelorussia. however, other senior german officials like ribbentrop saw an opportunity to create a euroasian bloc against the british empire by inviting the soviet union into the tripartite pact. in november , negotiations took place to determine if the soviet union would join the pact. the soviets showed some interest but asked for concessions from finland, bulgaria, turkey, and japan that germany considered unacceptable. on  december , hitler issued the directive to prepare for an invasion of the soviet union.on  june , germany, supported by italy and romania, invaded the soviet union in operation barbarossa, with germany accusing the soviets of plotting against them. they were joined shortly by finland and hungary. the primary targets of this surprise offensive were the baltic region, moscow and ukraine, with the ultimate goal of ending the  campaign near the arkhangelskastrakhan line, from the caspian to the white seas. hitlers objectives were to eliminate the soviet union as a military power, exterminate communism, generate lebensraum  by dispossessing the native population and guarantee access to the strategic resources needed to defeat germanys remaining rivals.although the red army was preparing for strategic counteroffensives before the war, operation barbarossa forced the soviet supreme command to adopt a strategic defence. during the summer, the axis made significant gains into soviet territory, inflicting immense losses in both personnel and materiel. by midaugust, however, the german army high command decided to suspend the offensive of a considerably depleted army group centre, and to divert the nd panzer group to reinforce troops advancing towards central ukraine and leningrad. the  kyiv offensive was overwhelmingly successful, resulting in encirclement and elimination of four soviet armies, and made possible further advance into crimea and industrially developed eastern ukraine .

the diversion of threequarters of the axis troops and the majority of their air forces from france and the central mediterranean to the eastern front prompted the united kingdom to reconsider its grand strategy. in july, the uk and the soviet union formed a military alliance against germany and in august, the united kingdom and the united states jointly issued the atlantic charter, which outlined british and american goals for the postwar world. in late august the british and soviets invaded neutral iran to secure the persian corridor, irans oil fields, and preempt any axis advances through iran toward the baku oil fields or india.by october, axis operational objectives in ukraine and the baltic region were achieved, with only the sieges of leningrad and sevastopol continuing. a major offensive against moscow was renewed; after two months of fierce battles in increasingly harsh weather, the german army almost reached the outer suburbs of moscow, where the exhausted troops were forced to suspend their offensive. large territorial gains were made by axis forces, but their campaign had failed to achieve its main objectives two key cities remained in soviet hands, the soviet capability to resist was not broken, and the soviet union retained a considerable part of its military potential. the blitzkrieg phase of the war in europe had ended.by early december, freshly mobilised reserves allowed the soviets to achieve numerical parity with axis troops. this, as well as intelligence data which established that a minimal number of soviet troops in the east would be sufficient to deter any attack by the japanese kwantung army, allowed the soviets to begin a massive counteroffensive that started on  december all along the front and pushed german troops  kilometres  west.

following the japanese false flag mukden incident in , the japanese shelling of the american gunboat uss panay in , and the  nanjing massacre, japaneseamerican relations deteriorated. in , the united states notified japan that it would not be extending its trade treaty and american public opinion opposing japanese expansionism led to a series of economic sanctions, the export control acts, which banned u.s. exports of chemicals, minerals and military parts to japan and increased economic pressure on the japanese regime. during  japan launched its first attack against changsha, a strategically important chinese city, but was repulsed by late september. despite several offensives by both sides, the war between china and japan was stalemated by . to increase pressure on china by blocking supply routes, and to better position japanese forces in the event of a war with the western powers, japan invaded and occupied northern indochina in september .chinese nationalist forces launched a largescale counteroffensive in early . in august, chinese communists launched an offensive in central china; in retaliation, japan instituted harsh measures in occupied areas to reduce human and material resources for the communists. the continued antipathy between chinese communist and nationalist forces culminated in armed clashes in january , effectively ending their cooperation. in march, the japanese th army attacked the headquarters of the chinese th army but was repulsed during battle of shanggao. in september, japan attempted to take the city of changsha again and clashed with chinese nationalist forces.german successes in europe encouraged japan to increase pressure on european governments in southeast asia. the dutch government agreed to provide japan with some oil supplies from the dutch east indies, but negotiations for additional access to their resources ended in failure in june . in july  japan sent troops to southern indochina, thus threatening british and dutch possessions in the far east. the united states, the united kingdom, and other western governments reacted to this move with a freeze on japanese assets and a total oil embargo. at the same time, japan was planning an invasion of the soviet far east, intending to capitalise off the german invasion in the west, but abandoned the operation after the sanctions.since early , the united states and japan had been engaged in negotiations in an attempt to improve their strained relations and end the war in china. during these negotiations, japan advanced a number of proposals which were dismissed by the americans as inadequate. at the same time the united states, the united kingdom, and the netherlands engaged in secret discussions for the joint defence of their territories, in the event of a japanese attack against any of them. roosevelt reinforced the philippines  and warned japan that the united states would react to japanese attacks against any neighboring countries.

frustrated at the lack of progress and feeling the pinch of the americanbritishdutch sanctions, japan prepared for war. emperor hirohito, after initial hesitation about japans chances of victory, began to favour japans entry into the war. as a result, prime minister fumimaro konoe resigned. hirohito refused the recommendation to appoint prince naruhiko higashikuni in his place, choosing war minister hideki tojo instead. on  november, nagano explained in detail the plan of the attack on pearl harbor to the emperor. on  november, hirohito approved in imperial conference the operations plan for the war. on  november, the new government presented an interim proposal as its final offer. it called for the end of american aid to china and for lifting the embargo on the supply of oil and other resources to japan. in exchange, japan promised not to launch any attacks in southeast asia and to withdraw its forces from southern indochina. the american counterproposal of  november required that japan evacuate all of china without conditions and conclude nonaggression pacts with all pacific powers. that meant japan was essentially forced to choose between abandoning its ambitions in china, or seizing the natural resources it needed in the dutch east indies by force; the japanese military did not consider the former an option, and many officers considered the oil embargo an unspoken declaration of war.japan planned to seize european colonies in asia to create a large defensive perimeter stretching into the central pacific. the japanese would then be free to exploit the resources of southeast asia while exhausting the overstretched allies by fighting a defensive war. to prevent american intervention while securing the perimeter, it was further planned to neutralise the united states pacific fleet and the american military presence in the philippines from the outset. on  december  , japan attacked british and american holdings with nearsimultaneous offensives against southeast asia and the central pacific. these included an attack on the american fleets at pearl harbor and the philippines, as well as invasions of guam, wake island, malaya, thailand, and hong kong.the japanese invasion of thailand led to thailands decision to ally itself with japan and the other japanese attacks led the united states, united kingdom, china, australia, and several other states to formally declare war on japan, whereas the soviet union, being heavily involved in largescale hostilities with european axis countries, maintained its neutrality agreement with japan. germany, followed by the other axis states, declared war on the united states in solidarity with japan, citing as justification the american attacks on german war vessels that had been ordered by roosevelt.

on  january , the allied big fourthe soviet union, china, the united kingdom, and the united statesand  smaller or exiled governments issued the declaration by united nations, thereby affirming the atlantic charter, and agreeing not to sign a separate peace with the axis powers.during , allied officials debated on the appropriate grand strategy to pursue. all agreed that defeating germany was the primary objective. the americans favoured a straightforward, largescale attack on germany through france. the soviets were also demanding a second front. the british, on the other hand, argued that military operations should target peripheral areas to wear out german strength, leading to increasing demoralisation, and bolster resistance forces. germany itself would be subject to a heavy bombing campaign. an offensive against germany would then be launched primarily by allied armour without using largescale armies. eventually, the british persuaded the americans that a landing in france was infeasible in  and they should instead focus on driving the axis out of north africa.at the casablanca conference in early , the allies reiterated the statements issued in the  declaration and demanded the unconditional surrender of their enemies. the british and americans agreed to continue to press the initiative in the mediterranean by invading sicily to fully secure the mediterranean supply routes. although the british argued for further operations in the balkans to bring turkey into the war, in may , the americans extracted a british commitment to limit allied operations in the mediterranean to an invasion of the italian mainland and to invade france in .

by the end of april , japan and its ally thailand had almost fully conquered burma, malaya, the dutch east indies, singapore, and rabaul, inflicting severe losses on allied troops and taking a large number of prisoners. despite stubborn resistance by filipino and u.s. forces, the philippine commonwealth was eventually captured in may , forcing its government into exile. on  april, in burma, , british soldiers were encircled by the japanese rd division during the battle of yenangyaung and rescued by the chinese th division. japanese forces also achieved naval victories in the south china sea, java sea, and indian ocean, and bombed the allied naval base at darwin, australia. in january , the only allied success against japan was a chinese victory at changsha. these easy victories over the unprepared u.s. and european opponents left japan overconfident, as well as overextended.in early may , japan initiated operations to capture port moresby by amphibious assault and thus sever communications and supply lines between the united states and australia. the planned invasion was thwarted when an allied task force, centred on two american fleet carriers, fought japanese naval forces to a draw in the battle of the coral sea. japans next plan, motivated by the earlier doolittle raid, was to seize midway atoll and lure american carriers into battle to be eliminated; as a diversion, japan would also send forces to occupy the aleutian islands in alaska. in midmay, japan started the zhejiangjiangxi campaign in china, with the goal of inflicting retribution on the chinese who aided the surviving american airmen in the doolittle raid by destroying chinese air bases and fighting against the chinese rd and nd army groups. in early june, japan put its operations into action, but the americans, having broken japanese naval codes in late may, were fully aware of the plans and order of battle, and used this knowledge to achieve a decisive victory at midway over the imperial japanese navy.with its capacity for aggressive action greatly diminished as a result of the midway battle, japan chose to focus on a belated attempt to capture port moresby by an overland campaign in the territory of papua. the americans planned a counterattack against japanese positions in the southern solomon islands, primarily guadalcanal, as a first step towards capturing rabaul, the main japanese base in southeast asia.both plans started in july, but by midseptember, the battle for guadalcanal took priority for the japanese, and troops in new guinea were ordered to withdraw from the port moresby area to the northern part of the island, where they faced australian and united states troops in the battle of bunagona. guadalcanal soon became a focal point for both sides with heavy commitments of troops and ships in the battle for guadalcanal. by the start of , the japanese were defeated on the island and withdrew their troops. in burma, commonwealth forces mounted two operations. the first, an offensive into the arakan region in late , went disastrously, forcing a retreat back to india by may . the second was the insertion of irregular forces behind japanese frontlines in february which, by the end of april, had achieved mixed results.

despite considerable losses, in early  germany and its allies stopped a major soviet offensive in central and southern russia, keeping most territorial gains they had achieved during the previous year. in may, the germans defeated soviet offensives in the kerch peninsula and at kharkov, and then launched their main summer offensive against southern russia in june , to seize the oil fields of the caucasus and occupy the kuban steppe, while maintaining positions on the northern and central areas of the front. the germans split army group south into two groups army group a advanced to the lower don river and struck southeast to the caucasus, while army group b headed towards the volga river. the soviets decided to make their stand at stalingrad on the volga.by midnovember, the germans had nearly taken stalingrad in bitter street fighting. the soviets began their second winter counteroffensive, starting with an encirclement of german forces at stalingrad, and an assault on the rzhev salient near moscow, though the latter failed disastrously. by early february , the german army had taken tremendous losses; german troops at stalingrad had been defeated, and the frontline had been pushed back beyond its position before the summer offensive. in midfebruary, after the soviet push had tapered off, the germans launched another attack on kharkov, creating a salient in their front line around the soviet city of kursk.

exploiting poor american naval command decisions, the german navy ravaged allied shipping off the american atlantic coast. by november , commonwealth forces had launched a counteroffensive, operation crusader, in north africa, and reclaimed all the gains the germans and italians had made. in north africa, the germans launched an offensive in january, pushing the british back to positions at the gazala line by early february, followed by a temporary lull in combat which germany used to prepare for their upcoming offensives. concerns the japanese might use bases in vichyheld madagascar caused the british to invade the island in early may . an axis offensive in libya forced an allied retreat deep inside egypt until axis forces were stopped at el alamein. on the continent, raids of allied commandos on strategic targets, culminating in the disastrous dieppe raid, demonstrated the western allies inability to launch an invasion of continental europe without much better preparation, equipment, and operational security.in august , the allies succeeded in repelling a second attack against el alamein and, at a high cost, managed to deliver desperately needed supplies to the besieged malta. a few months later, the allies commenced an attack of their own in egypt, dislodging the axis forces and beginning a drive west across libya. this attack was followed up shortly after by angloamerican landings in french north africa, which resulted in the region joining the allies. hitler responded to the french colonys defection by ordering the occupation of vichy france; although vichy forces did not resist this violation of the armistice, they managed to scuttle their fleet to prevent its capture by german forces. the axis forces in africa withdrew into tunisia, which was conquered by the allies in may .in june , the british and americans began a strategic bombing campaign against germany with a goal to disrupt the war economy, reduce morale, and dehouse the civilian population. the firebombing of hamburg was among the first attacks in this campaign, inflicting significant casualties and considerable losses on infrastructure of this important industrial centre.

after the guadalcanal campaign, the allies initiated several operations against japan in the pacific. in may , canadian and u.s. forces were sent to eliminate japanese forces from the aleutians. soon after, the united states, with support from australia, new zealand and pacific islander forces, began major ground, sea and air operations to isolate rabaul by capturing surrounding islands, and breach the japanese central pacific perimeter at the gilbert and marshall islands. by the end of march , the allies had completed both of these objectives and had also neutralised the major japanese base at truk in the caroline islands. in april, the allies launched an operation to retake western new guinea.in the soviet union, both the germans and the soviets spent the spring and early summer of  preparing for large offensives in central russia. on  july , germany attacked soviet forces around the kursk bulge. within a week, german forces had exhausted themselves against the soviets deeply echeloned and wellconstructed defences, and for the first time in the war, hitler cancelled an operation before it had achieved tactical or operational success. this decision was partially affected by the western allies invasion of sicily launched on  july, which, combined with previous italian failures, resulted in the ousting and arrest of mussolini later that month.on  july , the soviets launched their own counteroffensives, thereby dispelling any chance of german victory or even stalemate in the east. the soviet victory at kursk marked the end of german superiority, giving the soviet union the initiative on the eastern front. the germans tried to stabilise their eastern front along the hastily fortified pantherwotan line, but the soviets broke through it at smolensk and by the lower dnieper offensive.on  september , the western allies invaded the italian mainland, following italys armistice with the allies and the ensuing german occupation of italy. germany, with the help of fascists, responded to the armistice by disarming italian forces that were in many places without superior orders, seizing military control of italian areas, and creating a series of defensive lines. german special forces then rescued mussolini, who then soon established a new client state in germanoccupied italy named the italian social republic, causing an italian civil war. the western allies fought through several lines until reaching the main german defensive line in midnovember.

german operations in the atlantic also suffered. by may , as allied countermeasures became increasingly effective, the resulting sizeable german submarine losses forced a temporary halt of the german atlantic naval campaign. in november , franklin d. roosevelt and winston churchill met with chiang kaishek in cairo and then with joseph stalin in tehran. the former conference determined the postwar return of japanese territory and the military planning for the burma campaign, while the latter included agreement that the western allies would invade europe in  and that the soviet union would declare war on japan within three months of germanys defeat.from november , during the sevenweek battle of changde, the chinese forced japan to fight a costly war of attrition, while awaiting allied relief. in january , the allies launched a series of attacks in italy against the line at monte cassino and tried to outflank it with landings at anzio.on  january , soviet troops launched a major offensive that expelled german forces from the leningrad region, thereby ending the most lethal siege in history. the following soviet offensive was halted on the prewar estonian border by the german army group north aided by estonians hoping to reestablish national independence. this delay slowed subsequent soviet operations in the baltic sea region. by late may , the soviets had liberated crimea, largely expelled axis forces from ukraine, and made incursions into romania, which were repulsed by the axis troops. the allied offensives in italy had succeeded and, at the expense of allowing several german divisions to retreat, rome was captured on june .the allies had mixed success in mainland asia. in march , the japanese launched the first of two invasions, an operation against allied positions in assam, india, and soon besieged commonwealth positions at imphal and kohima. in may , british and indian forces mounted a counteroffensive that drove japanese troops back to burma by july, and chinese forces that had invaded northern burma in late  besieged japanese troops in myitkyina. the second japanese invasion of china aimed to destroy chinas main fighting forces, secure railways between japaneseheld territory and capture allied airfields. by june, the japanese had conquered the province of henan and begun a new attack on changsha.

on  june  , after three years of soviet pressure, the western allies invaded northern france. after reassigning several allied divisions from italy, they also attacked southern france. these landings were successful and led to the defeat of the german army units in france. paris was liberated on  august by the local resistance assisted by the free french forces, both led by general charles de gaulle, and the western allies continued to push back german forces in western europe during the latter part of the year. an attempt to advance into northern germany spearheaded by a major airborne operation in the netherlands failed. after that, the western allies slowly pushed into germany, but failed to cross the rur river in a large offensive. in italy, the allied advance also slowed due to the last major german defensive line.on  june, the soviets launched a strategic offensive in belarus  that almost destroyed the german army group centre. soon after that, another soviet strategic offensive forced german troops from western ukraine and eastern poland. the soviets formed the polish committee of national liberation to control territory in poland and combat the polish armia krajowa; the soviet red army remained in the praga district on the other side of the vistula and watched passively as the germans quelled the warsaw uprising initiated by the armia krajowa. the national uprising in slovakia was also quelled by the germans. the soviet red armys strategic offensive in eastern romania cut off and destroyed the considerable german troops there and triggered a successful coup dtat in romania and in bulgaria, followed by those countries shift to the allied side.

in september , soviet troops advanced into yugoslavia and forced the rapid withdrawal of german army groups e and f in greece, albania and yugoslavia to rescue them from being cut off. by this point, the communistled partisans under marshal josip broz tito, who had led an increasingly successful guerrilla campaign against the occupation since , controlled much of the territory of yugoslavia and engaged in delaying efforts against german forces further south. in northern serbia, the soviet red army, with limited support from bulgarian forces, assisted the partisans in a joint liberation of the capital city of belgrade on  october. a few days later, the soviets launched a massive assault against germanoccupied hungary that lasted until the fall of budapest in february . unlike impressive soviet victories in the balkans, bitter finnish resistance to the soviet offensive in the karelian isthmus denied the soviets occupation of finland and led to a sovietfinnish armistice on relatively mild conditions, although finland was forced to fight their former german allies.by the start of july , commonwealth forces in southeast asia had repelled the japanese sieges in assam, pushing the japanese back to the chindwin river while the chinese captured myitkyina. in september , chinese forces captured mount song and reopened the burma road. in china, the japanese had more successes, having finally captured changsha in midjune and the city of hengyang by early august. soon after, they invaded the province of guangxi, winning major engagements against chinese forces at guilin and liuzhou by the end of november and successfully linking up their forces in china and indochina by middecember.in the pacific, u.s. forces continued to press back the japanese perimeter. in midjune , they began their offensive against the mariana and palau islands and decisively defeated japanese forces in the battle of the philippine sea. these defeats led to the resignation of the japanese prime minister, hideki tojo, and provided the united states with air bases to launch intensive heavy bomber attacks on the japanese home islands. in late october, american forces invaded the filipino island of leyte; soon after, allied naval forces scored another large victory in the battle of leyte gulf, one of the largest naval battles in history.

on  december , germany made a last attempt on the western front by using most of its remaining reserves to launch a massive counteroffensive in the ardennes and along the frenchgerman border to split the western allies, encircle large portions of western allied troops and capture their primary supply port at antwerp to prompt a political settlement. by  january , the offensive had been repulsed with no strategic objectives fulfilled. in italy, the western allies remained stalemated at the german defensive line. in midjanuary , the red army attacked in poland, pushing from the vistula to the oder river in germany, and overran east prussia. on  february soviet, british, and u.s. leaders met for the yalta conference. they agreed on the occupation of postwar germany, and on when the soviet union would join the war against japan.in february, the soviets entered silesia and pomerania, while the western allies entered western germany and closed to the rhine river. by march, the western allies crossed the rhine north and south of the ruhr, encircling the german army group b. in early march, in an attempt to protect its last oil reserves in hungary and to retake budapest, germany launched its last major offensive against soviet troops near lake balaton. in two weeks, the offensive had been repulsed, the soviets advanced to vienna, and captured the city. in early april, soviet troops captured knigsberg, while the western allies finally pushed forward in italy and swept across western germany capturing hamburg and nuremberg. american and soviet forces met at the elbe river on  april, leaving several unoccupied pockets in southern germany and around berlin.

soviet troops stormed and captured berlin in late april. in italy, german forces surrendered on  april. on  april, the reichstag was captured, signalling the military defeat of nazi germany, and the berlin garrison surrendered on  may.

major changes in leadership occurred on both sides during this period. on  april, president roosevelt died and was succeeded by his vice president, harry s. truman. benito mussolini was killed by italian partisans on  april. on  april, hitler committed suicide in his headquarters, and he was succeeded by grand admiral karl dnitz and joseph goebbels. total and unconditional surrender in europe was signed on  and  may, to be effective by the end of  may. german army group centre resisted in prague until  may.in the pacific theatre, american forces accompanied by the forces of the philippine commonwealth advanced in the philippines, clearing leyte by the end of april . they landed on luzon in january  and recaptured manila in march. fighting continued on luzon, mindanao, and other islands of the philippines until the end of the war. meanwhile, the united states army air forces launched a massive firebombing campaign of strategic cities in japan in an effort to destroy japanese war industry and civilian morale. a devastating bombing raid on tokyo of  march was the deadliest conventional bombing raid in history.

in may , australian troops landed in borneo, overrunning the oilfields there. british, american, and chinese forces defeated the japanese in northern burma in march, and the british pushed on to reach rangoon by  may. chinese forces started a counterattack in the battle of west hunan that occurred between  april and  june . american naval and amphibious forces also moved towards japan, taking iwo jima by march, and okinawa by the end of june. at the same time, a naval blockade by submarines was strangling japans economy and drastically reducing its ability to supply overseas forces.on  july, allied leaders met in potsdam, germany. they confirmed earlier agreements about germany, and the american, british and chinese governments reiterated the demand for unconditional surrender of japan, specifically stating that the alternative for japan is prompt and utter destruction. during this conference, the united kingdom held its general election, and clement attlee replaced churchill as prime minister.the call for unconditional surrender was rejected by the japanese government, which believed it would be capable of negotiating for more favourable surrender terms. in early august, the united states dropped atomic bombs on the japanese cities of hiroshima and nagasaki. between the two bombings, the soviets, pursuant to the yalta agreement, invaded japaneseheld manchuria and quickly defeated the kwantung army, which was the largest japanese fighting force. these two events persuaded previously adamant imperial army leaders to accept surrender terms. the red army also captured the southern part of sakhalin island and the kuril islands. on the night of  august , emperor hirohito announced his decision to accept the terms demanded by the allies in the potsdam declaration. on  august, the emperor communicated this decision to the japanese people through a speech broadcast on the radio . on  august , japan surrendered, with the surrender documents finally signed at tokyo bay on the deck of the american battleship uss missouri on  september , ending the war.

the allies established occupation administrations in austria and germany, both initially divided between western and eastern occupation zones controlled by the western allies and the soviet union, respectively. however, their paths soon diverged. in germany, the western and eastern occupation zones controlled by the western allies and the soviet union officially ended in , with the respective zones becoming separate countries, west germany and east germany. in austria, however, occupation continued until , when a joint settlement between the western allies and the soviet union permitted the reunification of austria as a neutral democratic state, officially nonaligned with any political bloc . a denazification program in germany led to the prosecution of nazi war criminals in the nuremberg trials and the removal of exnazis from power, although this policy moved towards amnesty and reintegration of exnazis into west german society.germany lost a quarter of its prewar  territory. among the eastern territories, silesia, neumark and most of pomerania were taken over by poland, and east prussia was divided between poland and the soviet union, followed by the expulsion to germany of the nine million germans from these provinces, as well as three million germans from the sudetenland in czechoslovakia. by the s, onefifth of west germans were refugees from the east. the soviet union also took over the polish provinces east of the curzon line, from which  million poles were expelled; northeast romania, parts of eastern finland, and the three baltic states were annexed into the soviet union. italy lost its monarchy, colonial empire and some european territories.in an effort to maintain world peace, the allies formed the united nations, which officially came into existence on  october , and adopted the universal declaration of human rights in  as a common standard for all member nations. the great powers that were the victors of the warfrance, china, the united kingdom, the soviet union and the united statesbecame the permanent members of the uns security council. the five permanent members remain so to the present, although there have been two seat changes, between the republic of china and the peoples republic of china in , and between the soviet union and its successor state, the russian federation, following the dissolution of the ussr in . the alliance between the western allies and the soviet union had begun to deteriorate even before the war was over.

besides germany, the rest of europe was also divided into western and soviet spheres of influence. most eastern and central european countries fell into the soviet sphere, which led to establishment of communistled regimes, with full or partial support of the soviet occupation authorities. as a result, east germany, poland, hungary, romania, bulgaria, czechoslovakia, and albania became soviet satellite states. communist yugoslavia conducted a fully independent policy, causing tension with the soviet union. a communist uprising in greece was put down with angloamerican support and the country remained aligned with the west.postwar division of the world was formalised by two international military alliances, the united statesled nato and the sovietled warsaw pact. the long period of political tensions and military competition between them, the cold war, would be accompanied by an unprecedented arms race and number of proxy wars throughout the world.in asia, the united states led the occupation of japan and administered japans former islands in the western pacific, while the soviets annexed south sakhalin and the kuril islands. korea, formerly under japanese colonial rule, was divided and occupied by the soviet union in the north and the united states in the south between  and . separate republics emerged on both sides of the th parallel in , each claiming to be the legitimate government for all of korea, which led ultimately to the korean war.in china, nationalist and communist forces resumed the civil war in june . communist forces were victorious and established the peoples republic of china on the mainland, while nationalist forces retreated to taiwan in . in the middle east, the arab rejection of the united nations partition plan for palestine and the creation of israel marked the escalation of the arabisraeli conflict. while european powers attempted to retain some or all of their colonial empires, their losses of prestige and resources during the war rendered this unsuccessful, leading to decolonisation.the global economy suffered heavily from the war, although participating nations were affected differently. the united states emerged much richer than any other nation, leading to a baby boom, and by  its gross domestic product per person was much higher than that of any of the other powers, and it dominated the world economy. the allied occupational authorities pursued a policy of industrial disarmament in western germany from  to . due to international trade interdependencies, this policy led to an economic stagnation in europe and delayed european recovery from the war for several years.at the bretton woods conference in july , the allied nations drew up an economic framework for the postwar world. the agreement created the international monetary fund  and the international bank for reconstruction and development , which later became part of the world bank group. the bretton woods system lasted until . recovery began with the mid currency reform in western germany, and was sped up by the liberalisation of european economic policy that the u.s. marshall plan economic aid  both directly and indirectly caused. the post west german recovery has been called the german economic miracle. italy also experienced an economic boom and the french economy rebounded. by contrast, the united kingdom was in a state of economic ruin, and although receiving a quarter of the total marshall plan assistance, more than any other european country, it continued in relative economic decline for decades. the soviet union, despite enormous human and material losses, also experienced rapid increase in production in the immediate postwar era, having seized and transferred most of germanys industrial plants and exacted war reparations from its satellite states. japan recovered much later. china returned to its prewar industrial production by .

estimates for the total number of casualties in the war vary, because many deaths went unrecorded. most suggest that some  million people died in the war, including about  million military personnel and  million civilians.the soviet union alone lost around  million people during the war, including . million military and  million civilian deaths. a quarter of the total people in the soviet union were wounded or killed. germany sustained . million military losses, mostly on the eastern front and during the final battles in germany.an estimated  to  million civilians died as a direct or as an indirect result of hitlers racist policies, including mass killing of around  million jews, along with roma, homosexuals, at least . million ethnic poles and millions of other slavs , and other ethnic and minority groups. between  and , more than , ethnic serbs, along with gypsies and jews, were persecuted and murdered by the axisaligned croatian ustae in yugoslavia. concurrently, muslims and croats were persecuted and killed by serb nationalist chetniks, with an estimated ,, victims . also, more than , poles were massacred by the ukrainian insurgent army in the volhynia massacres, between  and . at the same time, about ,, ukrainians were killed by the polish home army and other polish units, in reprisal attacks.

in asia and the pacific, the number of people killed by japanese troops remains contested. according to r.j. rummel, the japanese killed between  million and more than  million people, with the most probable case of almost ,, people. according to the british historian m. r. d. foot, civilian deaths are between  million and  million, whereas chinese military casualties  are estimated to be over five million. other estimates say that up to  million people, most of them civilians, were killed. the most infamous japanese atrocity was the nanking massacre, in which fifty to three hundred thousand chinese civilians were raped and murdered. mitsuyoshi himeta reported that . million casualties occurred during the sank sakusen. general yasuji okamura implemented the policy in heipei and shantung.axis forces employed biological and chemical weapons. the imperial japanese army used a variety of such weapons during its invasion and occupation of china  and in early conflicts against the soviets. both the germans and the japanese tested such weapons against civilians, and sometimes on prisoners of war.the soviet union was responsible for the katyn massacre of , polish officers, and the imprisonment or execution of hundreds of thousands of political prisoners by the nkvd secret police, along with mass civilian deportations to siberia, in the baltic states and eastern poland annexed by the red army. soviet soldiers committed mass rapes in occupied territories, especially in germany. the exact number of german women and girls raped by soviet troops during the war and occupation is uncertain, but historians estimate their numbers are likely in the hundreds of thousands, and possibly as many as two million, while figures for women raped by german soldiers in the soviet union go as far as ten million.the mass bombing of cities in europe and asia has often been called a war crime, although no positive or specific customary international humanitarian law with respect to aerial warfare existed before or during world war ii. the usaaf bombed a total of  japanese cities, killing , civilians, including from the atomic bombings of hiroshima and nagasaki, and destroying  of builtup areas.

nazi germany, under the dictatorship of adolf hitler, was responsible for murdering about  million jews in what is now known as the holocaust. they also murdered an additional  million others who were deemed unworthy of life  as part of a program of deliberate extermination, in effect becoming a genocidal state. soviet pows were kept in especially unbearable conditions, and . million soviet pows out of . million died in nazi camps during the war. in addition to concentration camps, death camps were created in nazi germany to exterminate people on an industrial scale. nazi germany extensively used forced labourers; about  million europeans from germanoccupied countries were abducted and used as a slave work force in german industry, agriculture and war economy.the soviet gulag became a de facto system of deadly camps during , when wartime privation and hunger caused numerous deaths of inmates, including foreign citizens of poland and other countries occupied in  by the soviet union, as well as axis pows. by the end of the war, most soviet pows liberated from nazi camps and many repatriated civilians were detained in special filtration camps where they were subjected to nkvd evaluation, and , were sent to the gulag as real or perceived nazi collaborators.japanese prisonerofwar camps, many of which were used as labour camps, also had high death rates. the international military tribunal for the far east found the death rate of western prisoners was  percent , seven times that of pows under the germans and italians. while , prisoners from the uk, , from the netherlands, and , from the united states were released after the surrender of japan, the number of chinese released was only .at least five million chinese civilians from northern china and manchukuo were enslaved between  and  by the east asia development board, or kain, for work in mines and war industries. after , the number reached  million. in java, between  and  million rmusha , were forced to work by the japanese military. about , of these javanese labourers were sent to other japaneseheld areas in southeast asia, and only , were repatriated to java.

in europe, occupation came under two forms. in western, northern, and central europe  germany established economic policies through which it collected roughly . billion reichsmarks  by the end of the war; this figure does not include the sizeable plunder of industrial products, military equipment, raw materials and other goods. thus, the income from occupied nations was over  percent of the income germany collected from taxation, a figure which increased to nearly  percent of total german income as the war went on.in the east, the intended gains of lebensraum were never attained as fluctuating frontlines and soviet scorched earth policies denied resources to the german invaders. unlike in the west, the nazi racial policy encouraged extreme brutality against what it considered to be the inferior people of slavic descent; most german advances were thus followed by mass atrocities and war crimes. the nazis killed an estimated . million ethnic poles during the war in addition to polishjewish victims of the holocaust. although resistance groups formed in most occupied territories, they did not significantly hamper german operations in either the east or the west until late .

in asia, japan termed nations under its occupation as being part of the greater east asia coprosperity sphere, essentially a japanese hegemony which it claimed was for purposes of liberating colonised peoples. although japanese forces were sometimes welcomed as liberators from european domination, japanese war crimes frequently turned local public opinion against them. during japans initial conquest, it captured ,, barrels  of oil  left behind by retreating allied forces; and by , was able to get production in the dutch east indies up to  million barrels  of oil ,  percent of its  output rate.

in europe, before the outbreak of the war, the allies had significant advantages in both population and economics. in , the western allies  had a  percent larger population and a  percent higher gross domestic product than the european axis powers ; if colonies are included, the allies had more than a  advantage in population and a nearly  advantage in gdp. in asia at the same time, china had roughly six times the population of japan but only an  percent higher gdp; this is reduced to three times the population and only a  percent higher gdp if japanese colonies are included.the united states produced about twothirds of all the munitions used by the allies in world war ii, including warships, transports, warplanes, artillery, tanks, trucks, and ammunition.

though the allies economic and population advantages were largely mitigated during the initial rapid blitzkrieg attacks of germany and japan, they became the decisive factor by , after the united states and soviet union joined the allies, as the war largely settled into one of attrition. while the allies ability to outproduce the axis is often attributed to the allies having more access to natural resources, other factors, such as germany and japans reluctance to employ women in the labour force, allied strategic bombing, and germanys late shift to a war economy contributed significantly. additionally, neither germany nor japan planned to fight a protracted war, and had not equipped themselves to do so. to improve their production, germany and japan used millions of slave labourers; germany used about  million people, mostly from eastern europe, while japan used more than  million people in far east asia.

aircraft were used for reconnaissance, as fighters, bombers, and groundsupport, and each role developed considerably. innovations included airlift ; and strategic bombing . antiaircraft weaponry also advanced, including defences such as radar and surfacetoair artillery, in particular the introduction of the proximity fuze. the use of the jet aircraft was pioneered and, though late introduction meant it had little impact, it led to jets becoming standard in air forces worldwide.advances were made in nearly every aspect of naval warfare, most notably with aircraft carriers and submarines. although aeronautical warfare had relatively little success at the start of the war, actions at taranto, pearl harbor, and the coral sea established the carrier as the dominant capital ship . in the atlantic, escort carriers became a vital part of allied convoys, increasing the effective protection radius and helping to close the midatlantic gap. carriers were also more economical than battleships because of the relatively low cost of aircraft and not requiring to be as heavily armoured. submarines, which had proved to be an effective weapon during the first world war, were expected by all combatants to be important in the second. the british focused development on antisubmarine weaponry and tactics, such as sonar and convoys, while germany focused on improving its offensive capability, with designs such as the type vii submarine and wolfpack tactics. gradually, improving allied technologies such as the leigh light, hedgehog, squid, and homing torpedoes proved effective against german submarines.land warfare changed from the static frontlines of trench warfare of world war i, which had relied on improved artillery that outmatched the speed of both infantry and cavalry, to increased mobility and combined arms. the tank, which had been used predominantly for infantry support in the first world war, had evolved into the primary weapon. in the late s, tank design was considerably more advanced than it had been during world war i, and advances continued throughout the war with increases in speed, armour and firepower. at the start of the war, most commanders thought enemy tanks should be met by tanks with superior specifications. this idea was challenged by the poor performance of the relatively light early tank guns against armour, and german doctrine of avoiding tankversustank combat. this, along with germanys use of combined arms, were among the key elements of their highly successful blitzkrieg tactics across poland and france. many means of destroying tanks, including indirect artillery, antitank guns , mines, shortranged infantry antitank weapons, and other tanks were used. even with largescale mechanisation, infantry remained the backbone of all forces, and throughout the war, most infantry were equipped similarly to world war i. the portable machine gun spread, a notable example being the german mg , and various submachine guns which were suited to close combat in urban and jungle settings. the assault rifle, a late war development incorporating many features of the rifle and submachine gun, became the standard postwar infantry weapon for most armed forces.

most major belligerents attempted to solve the problems of complexity and security involved in using large codebooks for cryptography by designing ciphering machines, the most wellknown being the german enigma machine. development of sigint  and cryptanalysis enabled the countering process of decryption. notable examples were the allied decryption of japanese naval codes and british ultra, a pioneering method for decoding enigma benefiting from information given to the united kingdom by the polish cipher bureau, which had been decoding early versions of enigma before the war. another aspect of military intelligence was the use of deception, which the allies used to great effect, such as in operations mincemeat and bodyguard.other technological and engineering feats achieved during, or as a result of, the war include the worlds first programmable computers , guided missiles and modern rockets, the manhattan projects development of nuclear weapons, operations research, the development of artificial harbours and oil pipelines under the english channel. penicillin was first developed, massproduced and used during the war.

miley ray cyrus  is an american singer, songwriter, and actress. dubbed the pop chameleon, she has been recognized for her musical versatility and continual artistic reinventions. cyrus has been referred to as the teen queen of the s pop culture and regarded as one of the few examples of a child star who went on to have a successful career as an adult. among her accolades are  teen choice awards, four world music awards, three mtv video music awards, two billboard music awards, a peoples choice award, a glaad media award, and eight guinness world records. she was ranked as the ninthgreatest billboard  female artist of all time, and has been featured in listicles such as the time  in  and , forbes  under  in  and , and billboards greatest of all time artists in .one of six siblings, cyrus is the second daughter of country singer billy ray cyrus. she emerged as a teen idol while portraying the titular character of the disney channel television series hannah montana . as hannah montana, she attained two numberone and three topfive soundtracks on the billboard , and the u.s. billboard hot  topten single he could be the one. cyruss initial solo career consisted of the teenfriendly pop rock u.s. numberone albums meet miley cyrus  and breakout ; these releases contained the us topten singles see you again and  things. the extended play the time of our lives , peaked at number two in the u.s; its lead single party in the u.s.a. became one of the bestselling singles in the united states and was certified diamond by the riaa. cyrus also released the country pop ballad the climb, which peaked at number four. trying to reinvent her image, she explored dancepop in her third album, cant be tamed . the record received mixed reviews; however, its title track reached the top ten in the u.s.

following a hiatus, cyrus underwent a mature and provocative musical shift with the rb and hip hopinfused bangerz , which became her fifth numberone album. featuring the topfive single we cant stop and her first u.s. numberone wrecking ball, it earned cyrus her first grammy award nomination. she experimented with psychedelic music on her followup, the free album miley cyrus  her dead petz , embraced country pop on younger now , which yielded the u.s. topten single malibu, and incorporated trap on the ep she is coming . cyrus explored rock on plastic hearts , which topped the billboard top rock albums chart. her next, endless summer vacation , was preceded by the lead single flowers, which set several streaming and chart records and marked her second u.s. numberone.

outside of her music, cyrus starred in the films bolt , hannah montana the movie , the last song , lol , and so undercover , and appeared in guardians of the galaxy vol.  . on television, she led and produced the documentary, miley the movement , served as a coach on the singing competition series the voice , starred in the rachel, jack and ashley too episode from the netflix series black mirror , hosts the yearly nbc holiday special mileys new years eve party , and starred in and executive produced the disney documentary concert special, endless summer vacation  . in , she founded the nonprofit organization happy hippie foundation, which was supported by the web video series backyard sessions .

destiny hope cyrus was born november , , in franklin, tennessee, to leticia tish jean cyrus  and country singer billy ray cyrus. she was born with supraventricular tachycardia, a condition causing an abnormal resting heart rate. her birth name, destiny hope, expressed her parents belief that she would accomplish great things. her parents nicknamed her smiley, which they later shortened to miley, because she often smiled as an infant. in , she legally changed her name to miley ray cyrus; her middle name honors her grandfather, democratic politician ronald ray cyrus, who was from kentucky. cyruss godmother is singersongwriter dolly parton.against the advice of her fathers record company, cyruss parents secretly married on december , , a year after her birth. they had two more children, son braison and daughter noah. from a previous relationship, her mother has two other children, brandi and trace. her fathers first child, christopher cody, was born in april  and grew up separately with his mother, waitress kristin luckey, in south carolina.all of cyruss maternal siblings are established entertainers. trace is a vocalist and guitarist for the electronic pop band metro station. noah is an actress and along with braison, models, sings, and is a songwriter. brandi was formerly a musician for the indie rock band frank  derol and is a professional dj. the cyrus farmhouse is located on  acres of land outside nashville.cyrus attended heritage elementary school in williamson county while she and her family lived in thompsons station, tennessee. when she was cast in hannah montana, the family moved to los angeles and she attended options for youth charter schools studying with a private tutor on set. raised as a christian, she was baptized in a southern baptist church before moving to hollywood in . she attended church regularly while growing up and wore a purity ring. in , when cyrus was eight, she and her family moved to toronto, canada, while her father filmed the television series doc. after billy ray cyrus took her to see a  mirvish production of mamma mia at the royal alexandra theatre, miley cyrus grabbed his arm and told him, this is what i want to do, daddy. i want to be an actress. she began to take singing and acting lessons at the armstrong acting studio in toronto.cyruss first acting role was as kylie in her fathers television series doc. in , she received credit under her birth name for her role as young ruthie in tim burtons big fish. during this period she auditioned with taylor lautner for the feature film the adventures of sharkboy and lavagirl in d. although she was one of two finalists for the role, she chose to appear in hannah montana instead.her mother took on the role of mileys manager and worked to acquire a team to build her daughters career. cyrus signed with mitchell gossett, director of the youth division at cunningham escott slevin doherty. gossett is often credited with discovering cyrus and played a key role in her auditioning for hannah montana. she later signed with jason morey of morey management group to handle her music career; dolly parton steered her to him. she hired her fathers finance manager as part of her team.

cyrus auditioned for the disney channel television series hannah montana when she was thirteen years old. she auditioned for the role of the title characters best friend, but was called to audition for the lead role instead. despite being denied the part at first because she was too small and too young for the role, she was later cast as the lead because of her singing and acting abilities. the series premiered in march  to the largest audience for a disney channel program and quickly ranked among the highestrated series on basic cable. the success of the series led to cyrus being labeled a teen idol. she toured with the cheetah girls as hannah montana in september  and performed songs from the shows first season. walt disney records released a soundtrack credited to cyruss character in october of that year. the record was a commercial success, topping the billboard  chart in the united states; it went on to sell over three million copies worldwide. with the release of the soundtrack, cyrus became the first act within the walt disney company to have deals in television, film, consumer products, and music.cyrus signed a fouralbum deal with hollywood records to distribute her nonhannah montana soundtrack music. she released the twodisc album hannah montana  meet miley cyrus in june . the first disc was credited as the second soundtrack by hannah montana, while the second disc served as cyruss debut studio album. the album became her second to reach the top of the billboard , and has sold over three million copies. months after the release of the project, see you again  was released as the lead single from the album. the song was a commercial success, and has sold over two million copies in the united states since its release. she collaborated with her father on the single ready, set, dont go . next cyrus embarked on her highly successful best of both worlds tour  to promote its release. ticketmaster officials commented that there hadnt been a demand of this level or intensity since the beatles or elvis. the tours success led to the theatrical release of the d concert film hannah montana  miley cyrus best of both worlds concert . while initially intended to be a limited release, the films success led to a longer run.

cyrus and friend mandy jiroux began posting videos on the popular website youtube in february , referring to the clips as the miley and mandy show; the videos garnered a large online following. in april , several pictures of cyrus in her underwear and swimsuit were leaked online by a teenager who hacked her gmail account. further controversy erupted when it was reported that the thenyearold cyrus had posed topless during a photo shoot by annie leibovitz for vanity fair. the new york times subsequently clarified that although the shot left the impression that cyrus was barebreasted, she was wrapped in a bed sheet and was not topless.cyrus went on to release her second studio album, breakout , in june of that year. the album earned the highest firstweek sales of her career thus far and became her third to top the billboard . cyrus later starred with john travolta in the animated film bolt , her debut as a film actress; she also cowrote the song i thought i lost you  for the film, which she sings as a duet with travolta. the film was a critical and commercial success and earned her a golden globe award nomination for best original song.in march , cyrus released the climb  as a single from the soundtrack to the hannah montana feature film. it was met with a warm critical and commercial reaction, becoming a crossover hit in both pop and country music formats. the soundtrack, which features the single, went on to become cyruss fourth entry to top the billboard ; at age , she became the youngest artist in history to have four numberone albums on the chart. she released her fourth soundtrack as hannah montana in july , which debuted at number two on the billboard . cyrus later launched her first fashion line, miley cyrus and max azria, through walmart. it was promoted by the release of party in the u.s.a.  and the ep the time of our lives . cyrus said the record was a transitioning album ... really to introduce people to what i want my next record to sound like and with time i will be able to do that a little more. party in the u.s.a. became one of cyruss most successful singles to date and is considered to be one of her signature songs. she embarked on her first world tour, the wonder world tour  which was a critical and commercial success. on december , , cyrus performed for queen elizabeth ii and other members of the british royal family at the royal variety performance in blackpool, lancashire.billboard ranked her as the fourth bestselling female artist of .

hoping to foster a more mature image, cyrus starred in the film the last song , based on the nicholas sparks novel. it was met with negative critical reviews but was a box office hit. cyrus further attempted to shift her image with the release of her third studio album, cant be tamed . the album featured a more danceoriented sound than her prior releases and stirred a considerable amount of controversy over its lyrical content and cyruss live performances. it sold , copies in its first week of release and became her first studio album not to top the billboard  chart in the united states. the albums second and final single, who owns my heart was released solely in german territories. cyrus released her final soundtrack as hannah montana that october; it was a commercial failure.cyrus was the subject of further controversy when a video posted online in december  showed her, then aged eighteen, smoking salvia with a bong.  ended with her ranking at number thirteen on the forbes celebrity  list. she embarked on her worldwide gypsy heart tour in april  which had no north american dates; she cited her various controversial moments as the reason, claiming that she only wanted to travel where she felt the most love. following the release of cant be tamed, cyrus officially parted ways with hollywood records. with her obligations to hannah montana fulfilled, cyrus announced her plans to take a hiatus from music so she could focus on her acting career. she confirmed she would not be going to college.cyrus hosted the march , , episode of saturday night live where she poked fun at her recent controversies. that november it was announced that cyrus would be the voice of mavis in the animated film hotel transylvania; however by february  she was dropped from the project and replaced with selena gomez. at the time cyrus said her reason for leaving the movie was wanting to work on her music; later it was revealed the real reason behind her exit was because she bought her thenboyfriend liam hemsworth a birthday cake shaped like a penis and licked it. she made an appearance on the mtv television series punkd with kelly osbourne and khlo kardashian. cyrus starred alongside demi moore in the independent film lol . the film had a limited release; it was a critical and commercial failure. she starred in the comedy film so undercover playing the role of an undercover fbi agent at a college sorority.cyrus released a string of live performances known as the backyard sessions on youtube during the spring and summer of ; the performances were of classic songs she personally liked. having begun working on a failed fourth album the previous year, cyrus resumed working on a new musical project in late . she collaborated with producers rock mafia on their song morning sun , which was made available for free download online. she had previously appeared in the music video for their debut single, the big bang . cyrus later provided guest vocals on decisions  by borgore. both cyrus and hemsworth appeared in the songs music video. she went on to guest star as missi in two episodes of the cbs sitcom two and a half men. cyrus drew significant media attention when she cut her traditionally long, brown hair in favor of a blonde, pixie cut; she commented that she had never felt more herself in her whole life and that it really changed her life.

in , cyrus hired larry rudolph to be her manager, although she is currently managed by mavericks adam leber; rudolph is best known for representing britney spears. it was confirmed that cyrus had signed with rca records for her future releases. she worked with producers such as pharrell williams and mike will madeit on her fourth studio album, resulting in a hip hopinfluenced sound. she collaborated with numerous hip hop artists releases and appeared on the snoop lion song ashtrays and heartbreaks , released as the lead single from his twelfth studio album, reincarnated. she collaborated with will.i.am on the song fall down , released as a promotional single that same month. the song entered the billboard hot  at number fiftyeight, marking her first appearance on the chart since cant be tamed . she provided guest vocals on the lil twist song twerk, which also featured vocals by justin bieber. the song was unreleased for unknown reasons but leaked online. on may , , it was confirmed that cyrus would be featured on the mike will made it single , with wiz khalifa and juicy j. the single went on to peak at number eleven on the hot , and had sold over one million copies worldwide as of .cyrus released her new single we cant stop on june . touted as her comeback single, it became a worldwide commercial success, topping charts in territories such as the united kingdom. the songs music video set the vevo record for most views within twentyfour hours of release and became the first to reach  million views on the site. cyrus performed with robin thicke at the  mtv video music awards, a performance that resulted in widespread media attention and public scrutiny. her simulated sex acts with a foam finger were described as disturbing and the whole performance as cringeworthy. cyrus released wrecking ball  as the second single from bangerz on the same day as the vmas. the accompanying music video, which showed her swinging naked on a wrecking ball, was viewed over nineteen million times within  hours of its release, and drew criticism from some for allegedly objectifying cyrus, including fellow singer sinad oconnor, who said that you will obscure your talent by allowing yourself to be pimped, whether its the music business or yourself doing the pimping. despite this, the single became cyruss first to top the hot  in the us, and maintained the  spot for three weeks. it sold over two million copies.

on october , mtv aired the documentary miley the movement, that chronicled the recording of her fourth studio album bangerz, which was released on october . the album was a commercial success, debuting at number one on the billboard  with first week sales of , copies. on october , cyrus hosted saturday night live for the second time. on november , cyrus featured on rapper futures real and true with mr. hudson; an accompanying music video premiered five days later on november , . in late  she was declared artist of the year by mtv. on january , , she played an acoustic concert show on mtv unplugged, performing songs from bangerz featuring a guest appearance by madonna. it became the highestrated mtv unplugged in the past decade, with over . million streams. cyrus was also featured in the marc jacobs spring  campaign along with natalie westling and esmerelda seay reynolds. she launched her controversial bangerz tour  that year, which was positively received by critics. two months into her tour, cyruss alaskan klee kai was found mauled to death at her home after fighting with a coyote. two weeks later, cyrus suffered an allergic reaction to the antibiotic cephalexin, prescribed to treat a sinus infection, resulting in her hospitalization in kansas city. though she rescheduled some of her us tour dates, she resumed the tour two weeks later, beginning with the european leg.while collaborating with the flaming lips on their remake of the beatles sgt. peppers lonely hearts club band, with a little help from my fwends, cyrus began working with wayne coyne on her fifth studio album. she claimed that she was taking her time to focus on the music, and that the album would not be released until she felt it was ready. coyne compared his collaborative material with cyrus to the catalogs of pink floyd and portishead and described their sound as being a slightly wiser, sadder, more true version of cyruss pop music output. cyrus also worked on the films the night before  and a very murray christmas  during this period; both roles were cameos. reports began to surface in  that cyrus was working on two albums simultaneously, one of which she hoped to release at no charge. this was confirmed by her manager who claimed she was willing to end her contract with rca records if they refused to let her release a free album. cyrus was the host of the  mtv video music awards, making her its first openly pansexual host, and gave a surprise performance of a new song dooo it  during the shows finale. immediately following the performance, cyrus announced that her fifth studio album, miley cyrus  her dead petz , was available for free streaming on soundcloud. the album was written and produced primarily by cyrus, and has been called experimental and psychedelic, with elements of psychedelic pop, psychedelic rock, and alternative pop.

in , following the release of her fifth studio album the previous year, cyrus resumed working on her sixth studio effort. she was a key advisor during the tenth season of the reality singing competition the voice. in march, cyrus had signed on as a coach for the eleventh season of the voice as a replacement for gwen stefani; cyrus became the youngest coach to appear in any incarnation of the series. in september , cyrus costarred in crisis in six scenes, a television series woody allen created for amazon studios. she played a radical activist who causes chaos in a conservative s household while hiding from the police. on september , , she appeared on the tonight show starring jimmy fallon and covered bob dylans baby, im in the mood for you. cyrus also had an uncredited voice cameo as mainframe in the superhero film guardians of the galaxy vol. , released in may .

on may , , cyrus released malibu as the lead single from her sixth album. the single debuted at no.  on the billboard hot  and peaked at no.  on the chart on its second week. on june , cyrus released inspired after performing the song at the one love manchester benefit concert. it served as a promotional single from the album. on august , cyrus announced that her sixth studio album would be titled younger now and would be released on september , . the albums title track was released as the second single from the album on august  and debuted and peaked at no.  on the billboard hot . on august , cyrus performed the track at the  mtv video music awards. on september , she performed malibu, younger now, see you again, party in the u.s.a. and a cover of the roberta flack hit the first time ever i saw your face  for the bbc radio  live lounge. on october , as part of her oneweek regular musical appearances on the tonight show starring jimmy fallon, cyrus sang her  hit single the climb for the first time since  alongside a cover of no freedom by dido to honor the victims of the las vegas shooting. the former one has since then been performed at multiple charity events and democratic marches like march for our lives. that same year cyrus also returned as a coach in the thirteenth season of the voice after taking a oneseason hiatus. on october , , cyrus confirmed that she would not be returning to the voice for season fourteen. on october , , cyrus revealed she would neither release any further singles from younger now nor tour for it.

before the release of younger now in september , cyrus expressed she was already two songs deep on the next album. producers attached to her seventh studio album included previous collaborator mike will made it and new collaborators mark ronson and andrew wyatt. her first collaboration with ronson, nothing breaks like a heart from his  album late night feelings, was released on november , , to great commercial reception, especially in europe, where it peaked at number two on the uk singles chart as well as in ireland and topped the charts in several eastern european countries including hungary or croatia.during the first quarter of , cyrus became quite notable for her cover songs. having already taken part in musicares person of the year in  celebrating fleetwood mac, she returned the year after to honor the career of her godmother dolly parton by performing islands in the stream alongside canadian singersongwriter shawn mendes, with who she also performed in my blood a couple days later at the st grammy awards. cyruss other covers include her version of ariana grandes no tears left to cry for bbc radios live lounge, her participation at the chris cornell tribute concert i am the highway, where she sang as hope  promise fade as well as her cover record of elton johns dont let the sun go down on me, included in the tribute album revamp reimagining the songs of elton john  bernie taupin. cyrus also honored john at the im still standing a grammy salute to elton john tribute concert in , where she covered the bitch is back.

on may , , cyrus tweeted that her seventh studio album would be titled she is miley cyrus and would comprise three sixsong eps, which would be released before the fulllength album she is coming on may , she is here in the summer, and she is everything in the fall. she is coming, which also included vocal collaborations with rupaul, swae lee, mike will made it and ghostface killah, debuted at number five on the us billboard  with , albumequivalent units, while the lead single mothers daughter entered at number  on the us billboard hot . the wuki remix of mothers daughter received a nomination for best remixed recording at the nd annual grammy awards while the original music video won two mtv video music awards. cyrus promoted the ep with a summer european tour that visited alist festivals like glastonbury and primavera sound.cyrus starred in rachel, jack and ashley too, an episode of the netflix science fiction series black mirror, which was filmed in south africa in november . it was released on netflix on june , . in the episode, she played fictional pop star ashley o and voiced her ai doll extension, ashley too. the plot was compared to britney spearss conservatorship and the free britney movement, which cyrus has been an advocate for. the music video for the song on a roll from the episode was released on june ; the song itself and the bside right where i belong were released to digital platforms the next day.on june , it was revealed that cyrus had collaborated with ariana grande and lana del rey on dont call me angel, the lead single of the soundtrack to the  film charlies angels. it was released on september , . in august , cyrus released slide away, her first song since announcing her separation from thenhusband hemsworth. the song hinted at their breakup and contained lyrics such as move on, were not , im not who i used to be. a music video was released in september  that contained further references, including a ten of hearts playing card at the bottom of a pool to represent the end of her decadelong relationship with hemsworth.

on august , , cyrus released the lead single from her seventh studio album, midnight sky and confirmed the cancellation of the eps she is here and she is everything due to major recent changes in her life that did not fit the essence of the project, including her divorce from hemsworth, and the burning of the couples house during the woolsey fire in california. midnight sky became her highestcharting solo single since malibu in , peaking at number  on the us billboard hot . internationally, in the united kingdom the song has thus far peaked at number five on the uk singles chart. the track was later mashed up with stevie nicks edge of seventeen. in october, cyrus had a third backyard session on mtv and announced via instagram that her seventh studio album plastic hearts would be released on november , . it was previously intended to be called she is miley cyrus, completing the ep series once finalized. the album was released to positive reviews from critics and performed well, debuting at number two on the billboard , with , units, becoming her twelfth top ten entry on the chart. with that entry, cyrus broke the record for attaining the most us billboard  topfive albums in the st century by a female artist. plastic hearts marked a step of cyrus into rock and glam rock music and spawned two other singles prisoner featuring english singer dua lipa and angels like you, which peaked at  and  respectively in the united kingdom. the album also included vocal collaborations with billy idol and joan jett. due to popular demand and social media virality, cyrus included the live covers of blondies heart of glass and the cranberries zombie.cyrus won a  webby special achievement award. in february , cyrus performed at the very first tiktok tailgate show in tampa, for , vaccinated healthcare workers. it served as a preshow before super bowl lv. it aired on tiktok and cbs. the performance was featured in the music video for angels like you. in march , cyrus departed rca and signed with columbia records, a sister label of rca under the sony music umbrella. that same month cyrus embraced her days as hannah montana and wrote an open letter to the character on social media for the shows th anniversary, despite all statements that her days as montana gave cyrus an identity crisis. rumors about a possible revival of the show have been around ever since. on april , , the kid laroi released a remix of his single without you featuring cyrus, her first release under columbia records. on april , , cyrus performed at the ncaa march madness final four in indianapolis with the frontline health care workers in the audience. in may , she signed an overall deal with nbcuniversal, including a firstlook deal with her studio hopetown entertainment, as part of which she will develop projects for the companys outlets and star in three specials; with the first project off the deal being the stand by you pride concert special, which was released the following month on peacock. in june, cyrus released a studio cover version of metallicas nothing else matters, which was included in the metallica blacklist, a tribute album to the bands homonymous record, featuring renditions recorded by various artists and released in conjunction to the original albums th anniversary. the track also features elton john on the piano, yoyo ma and red hot chili peppers chad smith. the singer initially teased a metallica cover album in october  and had already performed the track live during her set at glastonbury.to promote plastic hearts, cyrus teased a concert tour around the albums release. the tour was postponed due to the pandemic but cyrus was able to headline several music festivals in the country during summer , including austin city limits, lollapalooza, and music midtown. later that year, she revealed she would tour south america for the first time in seven years in early . the second special off her deal with nbcuniversal was mileys new years eve party, which cyrus cohosted from miami with saturday night live cast member pete davidson and also coexecutive produced under her production company hopetown entertainment, featuring performances by cyrus, kgoldn, anitta, billie joe armstrong, brandi carlile, jack harlow, kitty cash, and saweetie.in february , cyrus embarked on her music festival concert tour, attention tour, in support of plastic hearts, which took place in north, south, and central america. this marked her first tour to south america since her gypsy heart tour in . the tour concluded on march , . on april , , cyrus released her third live album, attention miley live. most of the album was recorded during her concert as part of the super bowl music fest at the crypto.com arena in los angeles on february , , with the set list including songs from her albums plastic hearts, miley cyrus  her dead petz, bangerz, the time of our lives, breakout, and meet miley cyrus, along with multiple cover songs. the album also includes two unreleased tracksattention and you. she said the album was curated by the fans for the fans. emily swingle of clash gave acclaim to cyruss versatile vocals, saying her voice is truly a force to be reckoned with, seamlessly fitting whatever genre she chooses to tackle. from the playful, countryhiphop banger that is x, to rapheavy , to the bluesy, rich cover of janis joplins maybe, it seems like cyrus can fit into just about any genre she gets her paws on. by the end of that month, cyrus released the deluxe version of the album, which includes six additional songs including a mashup of mothers daughter and boys dont cry featuring anitta, that are mostly part of her time at the lollapalooza festival in brazil and other shows in latin america; she commented on the addition of her single angels like you at her concert in colombia in gratitude due to the song reaching the number one spot on itunes in that country and because her fans sang the song all night outside the hotel where she was staying in bogot. the following month, nbc announced that mileys new years eve party had been renewed for a second iteration set to be aired on new years eve . in august , it was announced that cyrus is set to star in a christmas television film dolly partons mountain magic christmas, produced by dolly parton for nbc.in december , morrissey announced that cyrus wanted her backing vocals taken off from his upcoming record that was recorded two years earlier, but not yet released.

cyrus and her longtime collaborator mike will made it teased potential new music to be released in , on the latters social media. cyrus continued to tease a new musical era through a cryptic promotional campaignwhich included posters in major cities around the world, countdowns on her website, and video previewswith the caption, new year, new miley. days later, during the second edition of mileys new years eve party, the singers next lead single, flowers, was announced. it was released on january , , accompanied by a music video directed by jacob bixenman. flowers debuted at number one on the billboard hot , global , and global excl. us charts; it spent thirteen weeks each atop the global charts. topping the hot  for eight nonconsecutive weeks, the song became cyruss longestrunning and second us numberone single, after nearly a decade since wrecking ball . it also topped the charts in australia, canada, france, germany, and the u.k. the demo and instrumental versions of flowers followed on march , . on january , cyrus announced her eighth studio album, endless summer vacation, which she coproduced with kid harpoon, greg kurstin, mike will made it, and tyler johnson; it was released on march , . the singer revealed the albums artwork and released a trailer in support of the announcement. her first studio effort with columbia records, she described the record as her love letter to los angeles, which reflects upon the strength she found in focusing on her physical and mental wellbeing. cyrus unveiled the tracklist by the end of february, revealing brandi carlile and australian singer sia as featured artists on the album. endless summer vacation debuted at number three on the us billboard  with firstweek sales of , albumequivalent units. it became her tenth topfive and fourteenth topten entry on the chart. the second single off the album, river, was released on march , . the song debuted at number  on the us hot  and peaked at number two on the hot dance/electronic songs chart. jaded, which peaked at number , became the third single in april ; a music video for the song followed in may.a documentary concert special, under her backyard sessions series, titled miley cyrus  endless summer vacation , premiered on disney, accompanying the albums release. executive produced by cyrus, it features the singer perform songs from the album, and her  single the climb. in june, she guestvoiced van in the second season of the netflix adult animated sitcom, human resources. she rerecorded her  song wrecking ball for a feature appearance on dolly partons album rockstar, set for release on november , .in august , cyrus started teasing a previously unreleased song titled used to be young. the single, extracted from the digital reissue of endless summer vacation, was ultimately released on august , , after the broadcast of the abc documentary concert special endless summer vacation continued .

miley cyrus has been described mainly as a pop singer who has also developed a rock style. her music has also spanned many other different genres including teen pop, country, hip hop, and psychedelic. cyrus has cited elvis presley as her biggest inspiration. she has also cited artists such as madonna, lana del rey, dolly parton, timbaland, whitney houston, christina aguilera, joan jett, lil kim, shania twain, hanson, onerepublic, and britney spears as influences. since the beginning of her music career, cyrus has been described as being predominantly a pop artist. her hannah montana  meet miley cyrus debut studio effort was characterized as sounding similar to her releases as hannah montana featuring a poprock and bubblegum pop sound. cyrus hoped that the release of breakout  would help distance her from this sound; the record featured cyrus experimenting with various genres. cyrus cowrote eight songs for the album and was quoted as saying i just hope this record showcases that, more than anything, im a songwriter. the songs on her early releases feature lyrics on the topics of love and relationships.cyrus possesses a mezzosoprano vocal range, although her vocals were once described as alto with a nashville twang in both her spoken and singing voice. her voice has a distinctive raspy sound to it, similar in vein to that of pink and amy winehouse. on party in the u.s.a. , her vocals feature belter refrains, while those on the song obsessed  are described as husky. releases such as the climb  and these four walls  feature elements of country music and showcase cyruss twangy vocals. cyrus experimented with an electropop sound on fly on the wall , a genre that she would explore further with the release of cant be tamed , her third studio album. it was initially intended to feature rock elements prior to its completion, and cyrus claimed after its release that it could be her final pop album. the albums songs speak of cyruss desire to achieve freedom in both her personal and professional life. she began working on bangerz  during a musical hiatus, and described the record as having a dirty south feel prior to its release. critics noted the use of hip hop and synthpop on the album. the albums songs are placed in chronological order telling the story of her failed relationship with liam hemsworth. cyrus described miley cyrus  her dead petz  as a little psychedelic, but still in that pop world. for her rockinfluenced album, plastic hearts, cyrus cited britney spears and metallica as major influences.

cyrus has become known for her controversial performances, most notably on her bangerz tour  and milky milky milk tour . her performance of party in the u.s.a. at the  teen choice awards sparked a national uproar because of her outfit and perceived pole dancing. she faced similar controversy over her performance of cant be tamed  on britains got talent, where the singer pretended to kiss one of her female backup dancers onstage; she defended the performance, arguing that she did nothing wrong. cyrus became the subject of media and public scrutiny following her performance of we cant stop  and blurred lines  with robin thicke at the  mtv video music awards. clad in a fleshcolored latex twopiece, she touched thickes crotch area with a giant foam finger and twerked against his crotch. the performance resulted in a media frenzy; one reviewer likened the performance to a bad acid trip, while another described it as a trainwreck in the classic sense of the word as the audience reaction seemed to be a mix of confusion, dismay and horror in a cocktail of embarrassment. cyrus entered the stage of her bangerz tour by sliding down a slide in the shape of a tongue, and draw media attention during the tour for her outfits and racy performances.

in the early years of her career, cyrus had a generally wholesome image as a teen idol. her fame increased dramatically in the wake of the vanity fair photo scandal in , and it was reported that photographs of cyrus could be sold to photo agencies for up to , per photo. in subsequent years, her image continued to shift dramatically from her teen idol status. in , donny osmond wrote of cyruss imminent transition to adulthood miley will have to face adulthood... as she does, shell want to change her image, and that change will be met with adversity. the release of her  album cant be tamed saw cyrus officially attempting to distance herself from her teenage persona by releasing controversial music videos for her songs cant be tamed and who owns my heart. her behavior throughout  and  sparked a substantial amount of controversy, although her godmother dolly parton said ...the girl can write. the girl can sing. the girl is smart. and she doesnt have to be so drastic. but i will respect her choices. i did it my way, so why cant she do it her waycyrus is number seventeen on forbes list of the most powerful celebrities in ; the magazine notes that the last time she made our list was when she was still rolling in hannah montana money. now the pop singer is all grown up and courting controversy at every turn. in august , her life was documented in a comic book titled fame miley cyrus; it begins with her controversial  mtv video music awards performance and covers her disney fame as well as exploring her childhood in tennessee. the comic book was written by michael l. frizell, drawn by juan luis rincn, and is available in both print and digital formats. in september , cyrus placed tenth on billboards firstever list of musics hottest minors of ; she was ranked twentyfirst in  and eighteenth in . in , maxim listed cyrus as number one on their annual hot  list. cyrus was chosen by time magazine as one of the finalists for person of the year in november ; she came in third place with . of the staff vote. in march , skidmore college in new york began to offer a special topics sociology course entitled the sociology of miley cyrus race, class, gender and media which was using miley as a lens through which to explore sociological thinking about identity, entertainment, media and fame. in , cyrus was listed as one of the nine runnersup for the advocates person of the year.

cyrus currently resides in hidden hills, california and also owns a . million home in her hometown of franklin. while cyrus was raised as a christian and identified herself as such during her childhood and early adult life, she includes references to tibetan buddhism in the lyrics to her song milky milky milk  and is also influenced by hindu beliefs.

cyrus came out to her mother at age  and has said i never want to label myself i am ready to love anyone that loves me for who i am i am open. in june , time magazine reported she is gender fluid. she was quoted as stating she doesnt relate to being boy or girl, and i dont have to have my partner relate to boy or girl. cyrus stated she is literally open to every single thing that is consenting and doesnt involve an animal and everyone is of age.cyrus is a supporter of the lgbt community. her song my heart beats for love  was written for one of cyruss gay friends, while she has since claimed london to be her favorite place to perform due to its extensive gay scene. cyrus also has an equals sign tattooed on her ring finger in support of samesex marriage. after her  marriage to a man, cyrus went on the record to state she still identified as queer. she is the founder of the happy hippie foundation, which works to fight injustice facing homeless youth, lgbtq youth and other vulnerable populations.

cyrus became a vegan and stopped eating animal products in . in september , cyrus revealed on the joe rogan experience that she had to switch to a pescatarian diet after suffering from omega deficiency, saying ive been a vegan for a very long time and i had to introduce fish and omegas into my life because my brain wasnt functioning properly. cyrus further revealed that she cried when eating her first fish after her vegan diet, saying i cried for the fish  it really hurts me to eat fish. her decision to quit being vegan sparked backlash from people in the vegan and vegetarian community, who accused cyrus of abandoning her vegan diet.

cyrus has been open about her recreational use of cannabis. she told rolling stone in  that it was the best drug on earth and called it, along with mdma, a happy drug. while accepting the best video award at the  mtv europe music awards, cyrus appeared to smoke a joint onstage; this was removed from the delayed broadcast of the show in the united states. in a  interview with w magazine, cyrus stated i love weed and i just love getting stoned. in a  interview on the tonight show starring jimmy fallon, cyrus revealed that she had quit cannabis before the press tour for her younger now album so she could be super clear when discussing the record. during a  interview with andy cohen, she credited her mother for reintroducing her to cannabis. in , cyrus sent nothing breaks like a heart collaborator mark ronson a cannabis bouquet from lowell herb co as a tongueincheek valentines day gift. she invested in the cannabis company in august.prior to undergoing vocal cord surgery in november , and after her postoperative recovery, cyrus has stated that she has stayed sober from the use of cannabis and alcohol.

cyrus has said that she dated singeractor nick jonas from june  to december , claiming they were in love and began dating soon after they first met. their relationship attracted considerable media attention. cyrus was in a ninemonth relationship with model justin gaston from  to . while filming the last song, cyrus began an onagain, offagain relationship with her costar liam hemsworth in . during the breakups, cyrus was romantically linked to actors lucas till  and josh bowman . cyrus and hemsworth were first engaged from may  until september . she has also dated actor patrick schwarzenegger  and model stella maxwell .cyrus and hemsworth rekindled their relationship in march , and became reengaged that october. in november , cyrus and hemsworths home burned down in the woolsey fire in california. on december , cyrus and hemsworth married in a private wedding ceremony in their home in nashville. she felt that her marriage redefined what it looks like for someone thats a queer person like herself to be in a hetero relationship though she was still very sexually attracted to women. cyrus indicated that the ceremony was kind of out of character for her because they have worn rings forever and definitely didnt need it in any way. she believed the loss of their home to be the catalyst for getting married, citing that the timing felt right and that no one is promised the next day, or the next, so she tries to be in the now as much as possible. on august , , cyrus announced their separation. eleven days later, hemsworth filed for divorce, citing irreconcilable differences. their divorce was finalized on january , .following the announcement of her separation from hemsworth, she dated kaitlynn carter from august to september . in october , cyrus began dating australian singer cody simpson, a longtime friend. in august , cyrus announced that she and simpson had split up. her announcement coincided with the release of her single midnight sky, which was inspired by her breakups with hemsworth, carter, and simpson.

throughout her career cyrus has sung on several charity singles such as just stand up, send it on, everybody hurts and we are the world  for haiti. she has visited sick fans in hospitals throughout the years. she is an avid supporter of the city of hope national medical center in california, having attended benefit concerts in ,  and . in  and , during her best of both worlds and wonder world tours, for every concert ticket sold, she donated one dollar to the organization. cyrus celebrated her th birthday at disneyland by delivering a  million donation from disney to youth service america. in july , cyrus performed at the elizabeth glaser pediatric aids foundations th annual a time for heroes celebrity picnic and donated several items including autographed merchandise, and a script from hannah montana for the ronald mcdonald house auction. cyrus has supported charities such as the elton john aids foundation, entertainment industry foundation, habitat for humanity, united service organizations, youth service america and music for relief.  in january , cyrus posted the final video to her mileymandy youtube account. in the video, cyrus promoted support for to write love on her arms. the next day, cyrus appeared in a promotional video for to write love on her arms with joaquin phoenix, and liv tyler.  in february , she donated several items, including the dress she wore to the nd annual grammy awards, and two tickets to the hollywood premiere of her film the last song, to raise money for the victims of the  haiti earthquake. in april , cyrus, working with the makeawish foundation, performed for and met with  children at the grove at farmers market in los angeles, california. cyrus has continued her support for the makeawish foundation and has met with at least  children.

in january , cyrus met an ailing fan with spina bifida with the charity kids wish network. in april , she appeared in a commercial for the american red cross asking people to pledge  to help those affected by the  thoku earthquake and tsunami. that same year, hilary duff presented cyrus with the firstever global action youth leadership award at the first annual global action awards gala for her support of blessings in a backpack, an organization that works to feed hungry children in schools, and her personal get ur good on campaign with the youth services of america. cyrus stated i want  to do something they love. not something that seems like a chore because someone tells them thats the right thing to do or what their parents want or whats important to people around them, but whats in their heart. in december , she appeared in a commercial for the charity j/p haitian relief organization, and teamed up with her elder brother trace cyrus to design a limited edition tshirt and hoodie for charity. all proceeds from the sale of these items went to her charity, get ur good on, which supports education for underprivileged children. that month, she performed the climb at the cnn heroes an allstar tribute at the shrine auditorium in los angeles.in , cyrus released a cover version of bob dylans youre gonna make me lonesome when you go featuring johnzo west for the charity amnesty international as a part of the album chimes of freedom. she also appeared in a commercial for the rock the vote campaign, which encouraged young people to make their voices heard by voting in the  federal election. for her th birthday, activists at people for the ethical treatment of animals  adopted a pig called nora in her name. cyrus also supports  wellknown charities, including makeawish foundation, cystic fibrosis foundation, st. judes childrens research hospital, to write love on her arms, noh campaign, love is louder than the pressure to be perfect and the jed foundation among others. in , cyrus was named the fourteenth most charitable celebrity of the year by do something. she also appeared with justin bieber and pitbull in a television special entitled the real change project artists for education. on july , , it was announced that cyrus would appear alongside justin timberlake at an hiv/aids charity event in the white house.at the  mtv video music awards, cyrus won video of the year for her song wrecking ball. instead of accepting the award herself, she invited a yearold homeless man by the name of jesse to collect it on her behalf; she had met him at my friends place, an organization that helps homeless youth find shelter, work, health care, and education. his acceptance speech urged musicians to learn more about youth homelessness in los angeles through cyruss facebook page. cyrus then launched a prizeo campaign to raise funds for the charity; those who made donations were entered into a sweepstake for a chance to meet cyrus on her bangerz tour in rio de janeiro that september. in early , cyrus teamed up with cosmetic company mac cosmetics to launch her own branded viva glam lipstick and the proceeds went to the mac aids fund.in june , cyrus performed at one love manchester, a televised benefit concert organized by ariana grande following the manchester arena bombing on her concert two weeks earlier. during an appearance on the ellen degeneres show in august , cyrus revealed that she would be donating , to hurricane harvey relief efforts. in august , she performed at the sunny hill festival in kosovo, a festival to raise funds to help people with financial difficulties in kosovo created by dua lipa and her father. in september , cyrus met with another fan through the makeawish foundation at the  iheartradio music festival in las vegas, nevada. cyrus and her thenboyfriend cody simpson donated  tacos to healthcare workers amid the covid pandemic in april . that same month, she partnered again with mac cosmetics to earmark  million from their annual viva glam campaign toward  local organizations nationwide heavily impacted by the pandemic.

cyrus has shown support for the black lives matter movement by sharing links and resources on social media, donning a black lives matter face mask, and attending protests following the murder of george floyd.

cyrus is the founder of the happy hippie foundation, which works to fight injustice facing homeless youth, lgbtq youth, and other vulnerable populations. since , the foundation has served nearly , homeless youth in los angeles, reached more than , lgbtq youth and their families with resources about gender, and provided social services to transgender individuals, youth in conflict zones, and people affected by crises. happy hippie encourages cyruss fans to support causes including gender equality, lgbtq rights and mental health through awareness campaigns and fundraising. leading up to the  presidential election, happy hippie encouraged its instagram followers to seek out voteriders for assistance ensuring that gender identity would not affect their right to vote.on june , , cyrus launched the campaign instapride in collaboration with instagram. the campaign features a series of portraits starring transgender and genderexpansive people, which were posted to her instagram feed with the hashtags happyhippiepresents and instapride. it was aimed at encouraging diversity and tolerance by showing these people in a positive light as examples for others who might be struggling to figure themselves out, as well as a reference point for people who didnt know personally anyone in that situation. cyrus was the one behind the camera for the photoshoot the whole time and even interviewed her  subjects to share their personal stories along with their portraits. she decided to predominate the color yellow since she believes it is a happy and nonsexualized color. she said she wanted to bring attention and celebrate people who wouldnt normally find themselves being the stars of a photoshoot or wouldnt find themselves on the cover of a magazine.following the loss of their malibu home from the woolsey fire, cyrus and hemsworth partnered with their community to launch the malibu foundation for relief efforts following the  california wildfires. through the happy hippie foundation, cyrus and hemsworth donated , to the malibu foundation.

cyruss early success as the face of disney channels billiondollar franchise hannah montana played an important role as shaping the s teen pop culture earning her the honorific nickname of teen queen. bickford stated hannah montana adopted a business model of combining celebrity acts with film, television, and popular music for a preadolescent audience. he called the series genredefining and likened this model to s teen pop artists such as britney spears and nsync, who were also marketed to children. morgan genevieve blue of feminist media studies stated the series primary female characters, miley and her alter ego hannah, are positioned as postfeminist subjects in a way their representation is confined to notions of femininity and consumerism. the times journalist craig mclean named cyrus the worlds biggestever teenage star.during the best of both worlds tour, tickets were sold out in minutes and stadiums were completely filled making it the highestgrossing concert tour for a new act in  and . according to billboard boxscore, the best of both worlds tour had a total attendance of approximately one million people and grossed over us million, earning cyrus the award for breakthrough act at the  billboard touring awards. in , rolling stone ranked cyrus as one of the top  teen idol breakout moments of the rock era, which andy greene wrote mileys rise was meteoric. tickets to her  best of both worlds tour sold out faster than any tour in memory ... it seemed like she was poised to become a more stable version of britney spears  especially after singles the climb and party in the usa. due to her popularity, paul mccartney compared their success to that of the beatles in an interview during his tour in . in this regard, he commented i think when they have new sensations, like miley cyrus or justin bieber, teenagers identify with them, in the same way that the boys identified with the beatles, ... when you have thousands of teenagers feeling the same, they become elated because they have this love for something in common, whether it is the beatles, miley cyrus, justin bieber, or whatever.over the years, cyruss song party in the u.s.a. gained popularity in american culture on holidays and historic events. the song has reentered the charts every independence day since its release. following the death of osama bin laden on may , , a resurgence in popularity of the music video occurred. the official youtube video was flooded with comments regarding the death of bin laden and it was immediately deemed a celebratory anthem for the event. in , an online petition on the white houses we the people petitions website was urging thenpresident barack obama to change the u.s. national anthem from the starspangled banner to party in the u.s.a. following the  presidential election, as major news outlets announced democratic nominee joe biden the winner of the presidential race, on november , , supporters in new york city started singing party in the u.s.a. at times square.cyruss album bangerz , along with its promotional events, is considered to be one of the most controversial moments in the s wider popular culture and established cyrus among the decades most controversial figures. glamour writer mickey woods likened the promotional era for the album to those of britney spearss and christina aguileras third and fourth studio albums britney  and stripped , respectively, adding that cyruss record will probably be retrospectively deemed iconic, maybe even classic. billboard listed bangerz as one of the best and most influential albums of the s noting that with this pivotal album release, cyrus took control of her public persona, surprising less with her provocative antics than with her constant artistic evolution. the album is considered a trendsetter in weaving together urban and pop influences, whats most revered now is what it represented then according to lyndsey havens. patrick ryan of usa today commented that cyruss collaborations with mike will made it on the album contributed to his newfound prominence, stating that mike will made its position as an executive producer has helped him jump to the forefront as an interesting character ... in an era where a lot of producers have fallen behind the scenes again. vice described cyrus as the most punk rock musician out there right now and that she is spinning circles around every single pop star who is trying to be edgy right now. mtv named cyrus their best artist of , and james montgomery of mtv news elaborated on the networks decision that cyrus declared her independence and dominated the popculture landscape, adding that she schooledand shockedus all in , and did so on her own terms. billboard staff called cyrus the most talked about pop star of , and also recognized the controversial evolution of her career as the top music moment of the year, elaborating that she was a maelstrom that expanded and grazed nearly every aspect of pop culture in .; the publication also listed we cant stop as best song of  for being one of the bolder musical choices in recent memory, and that risk paid off tremendously. and one of the songs that defined the decade stating it created a new play in the playbook of pop music.in , rebecca nicholson from the guardian published an article calling cyrus the madonna of her generation, saying that shes a disney survivor with a fluid approach to gender identity. and, like the old threechord punks, she gives really good quote. according to nicholson, cyrus takes the s madonna approach to public sexuality its deliberately provocative, and crucially, it is not being served up for male consumption. likewise, she defends cyruss controversial rebellion, highlighting that behind the character there is a human, talented and strong person who manages to connect with the public, just like the queen of pop. in november of the same year, billboard cataloged the singer as one of the greatest of all time billboard  artists, occupying position thirtyone. in , the aforementioned magazine also published an article naming the singer a queer superhero for her philanthropic fight for the lgbtq community.

meet miley cyrus 

breakout 

cant be tamed 

bangerz 

miley cyrus  her dead petz 

younger now 

plastic hearts 

endless summer vacation 

big fish 

hannah montana  miley cyrus best of both worlds concert 

bolt 

hannah montana the movie 

the last song 

lol 

so undercover 

miley the movement 

miley cyrus tongue tied 

miley cyrus bangerz tour 

the night before 

a very murray christmas 

guardians of the galaxy vol.  

mtv unplugged presents miley cyrus backyard sessions 

stand by you 

endless summer vacation  

headlining

best of both worlds tour 

wonder world tour 

gypsy heart tour 

bangerz tour 

milky milky milk tour 

attention tour opening act

the cheetah girls  the partys just begun tour 

charles iii  is king of the united kingdom and the  other commonwealth realms.charles was born in buckingham palace during the reign of his maternal grandfather, king george vi, and became heir apparent when his mother, queen elizabeth ii, acceded to the throne in . he was created prince of wales in  and his investiture was held in . he was educated at cheam school and gordonstoun, and later spent six months at the timbertop campus of geelong grammar school in victoria, australia. after earning a history degree from the university of cambridge, charles served in the royal air force and the royal navy from  to . in , he married lady diana spencer. they had two sons, william and harry. charles and diana divorced in , after they had each engaged in wellpublicised extramarital affairs. diana died as a result of injuries sustained in a car crash the following year. in , charles married his longterm partner, camilla parker bowles.

as heir apparent, charles undertook official duties and engagements on behalf of his mother. he founded the princes trust in , sponsored the princes charities, and became patron or president of more than  other charities and organisations. he advocated for the conservation of historic buildings and the importance of architecture in society. in that vein, he generated the experimental new town of poundbury. an environmentalist, charles supported organic farming and action to prevent climate change during his time as the manager of the duchy of cornwall estates, earning him awards and recognition as well as criticism; he is also a prominent critic of the adoption of genetically modified food, while his support for alternative medicine has been criticised. he has authored or coauthored  books.

charles became king upon his mothers death on  september . at the age of , he became the oldest person to accede to the british throne, after having been the longestserving heir apparent and prince of wales in british history. his coronation took place at westminster abbey on  may .

charles was born at   on  november , during the reign of his maternal grandfather, king george vi. he was the first child of princess elizabeth, duchess of edinburgh , and philip, duke of edinburgh. his parents had three more children, anne , andrew  and edward . on  december , at four weeks old, he was christened charles philip arthur george in the music room of buckingham palace by the archbishop of canterbury, geoffrey fisher.george vi died on  february  and charless mother acceded to the throne as elizabeth ii; charles immediately became the heir apparent. under a charter of edward iii in , and as the monarchs eldest son, he automatically assumed the traditional titles of duke of cornwall and, in the scottish peerage, the titles duke of rothesay, earl of carrick, baron of renfrew, lord of the isles, and prince and great steward of scotland. on  june the following year, charles attended his mothers coronation at westminster abbey.when charles turned five, a governess, catherine peebles, was appointed to oversee his education at buckingham palace. charles then commenced classes at hill house school in west london on  november . he was the first heir apparent to attend school, rather than be educated by a private tutor. he did not receive preferential treatment from the schools founder and headmaster, stuart townend, who advised the queen to have charles train in football, because the boys were never deferential to anyone on the football field. charles subsequently attended two of his fathers former schools cheam school in hampshire, from , followed by gordonstoun, in the northeast of scotland, beginning classes there in april .

in his  authorised biography by jonathan dimbleby, charless parents were described as physically and emotionally distant and philip was blamed for his disregard of charless sensitive nature, including forcing him to attend gordonstoun, where he was bullied. though charles reportedly described gordonstoun, noted for its especially rigorous curriculum, as colditz in kilts, he later praised the school, stating it had taught him a great deal about myself and my own abilities and disabilities. he said in a  interview he was glad he had attended gordonstoun and that the toughness of the place was much exaggerated. in , charles spent two terms at the timbertop campus of geelong grammar school in victoria, australia, during which time he visited papua new guinea on a school trip with his history tutor, michael collins persse. in , charles described his time at timbertop as the most enjoyable part of his whole education. upon his return to gordonstoun, charles emulated his father in becoming head boy and left in , with six gce olevels and two alevels in history and french, at grades b and c respectively. on his education, charles later remarked, i didnt enjoy school as much as i might have; but, that was only because im happier at home than anywhere else.charles broke royal tradition when he proceeded straight to university after his alevels, rather than joining the british armed forces. in october , he was admitted to trinity college, cambridge, where he studied archaeology and anthropology for the first part of the tripos and then switched to history for the second part. during his second year, charles attended the university college of wales in aberystwyth, studying welsh history and the welsh language for one term. charles became the first british heir apparent to earn a university degree, graduating on  june  from the university of cambridge with a  bachelor of arts  degree. following standard practice, on  august , his bachelor of arts was promoted to a master of arts  degree.

charles was created prince of wales and earl of chester on  july , though his investiture was not held until  july , when he was crowned by his mother in a televised ceremony held at caernarfon castle; the investiture was controversial in wales owing to growing welsh nationalist sentiment. he took his seat in the house of lords the following year and he delivered his maiden speech on  june , the first royal to speak from the floor since the future edward vii in . he spoke again in .charles began to take on more public duties, founding the princes trust in  and travelling to the united states in . in the mids, charles expressed an interest in serving as governorgeneral of australia, at the suggestion of australian prime minister malcolm fraser; however, because of a lack of public enthusiasm, nothing came of the proposal. in reaction, charles commented, so, what are you supposed to think when you are prepared to do something to help and you are just told youre not wanted

charles served in the royal air force  and the royal navy. during his second year at cambridge, he received royal air force training, learning to fly the chipmunk aircraft with the cambridge university air squadron, and was presented with his raf wings in august .

after the passingout parade that september, charles embarked on a naval career and enrolled in a sixweek course at the royal naval college dartmouth. he then served from  to  on the guidedmissile destroyer hms norfolk and the frigates hms minerva, from  to , and hms jupiter in . that same year, he also qualified as a helicopter pilot at rnas yeovilton and subsequently joined  naval air squadron, operating from hms hermes. charles spent his last  months of active service in the navy commanding the coastal minehunter hms bronington, beginning on  february . he took part in a parachute training course at raf brize norton two years later, after being appointed colonelinchief of the parachute regiment in . charles gave up flying after, as a passenger who was invited to fly the aircraft, crashlanding a bae  in islay in , for which the crew was found negligent by a board of inquiry.

in his youth, charles was amorously linked to a number of women. his girlfriends included georgiana russell, the daughter of sir john russell, who was the british ambassador to spain; lady jane wellesley, the daughter of the th duke of wellington; davina sheffield; lady sarah spencer; and camilla shand, who later became his second wife.

charless greatuncle lord mountbatten advised him to sow his wild oats and have as many affairs as he can before settling down, but, for a wife, he should choose a suitable, attractive, and sweetcharactered girl before she has met anyone else she might fall for ... it is disturbing for women to have experiences if they have to remain on a pedestal after marriage. early in , mountbatten began corresponding with yearold charles about a potential marriage to amanda knatchbull, mountbattens granddaughter. charles wrote to amandas mother, lady brabourne, who was also his godmother, expressing interest in her daughter. lady brabourne replied approvingly; though, she suggested that a courtship with a yearold was premature. four years later, mountbatten arranged for amanda and himself to accompany charles on his  visit to india. both fathers, however, objected; prince philip feared that his famous uncle would eclipse charles, while lord brabourne warned that a joint visit would concentrate media attention on the cousins before they could decide on becoming a couple.in august , before charles would depart alone for india, mountbatten was assassinated by the irish republican army. when charles returned, he proposed to amanda. but in addition to her grandfather, she had lost her paternal grandmother and youngest brother in the bomb attack and was now reluctant to join the royal family.

charles first met lady diana spencer in , while he was visiting her home, althorp. he was then the companion of her elder sister sarah and did not consider diana romantically until mid. while charles and diana were sitting together on a bale of hay at a friends barbecue in july, she mentioned that he had looked forlorn and in need of care at the funeral of his greatuncle lord mountbatten. soon, according to dimbleby, without any apparent surge in feeling, he began to think seriously of her as a potential bride and she accompanied charles on visits to balmoral castle and sandringham house.

charless cousin norton knatchbull and his wife told charles that diana appeared awestruck by his position and that he did not seem to be in love with her. meanwhile, the couples continuing courtship attracted intense attention from the press and paparazzi. when philip told him that the media speculation would injure dianas reputation if charles did not come to a decision about marrying her soon, and realising that she was a suitable royal bride , charles construed his fathers advice as a warning to proceed without further delay. he proposed to diana in february , with their engagement becoming official on  february; the wedding took place in st pauls cathedral on  july. upon his marriage, charles reduced his voluntary tax contribution from the profits of the duchy of cornwall from  per cent to  per cent. the couple lived at kensington palace and highgrove house, near tetbury, and had two children william, in , and harry, in .within five years, the marriage was in trouble due to the couples incompatibility and near year age difference. by november , charles had fully resumed his affair with camilla parker bowles. in a videotape recorded by peter settelen in , diana admitted that she had been deeply in love with someone who worked in this environment. it was assumed that she was referring to barry mannakee, who had been transferred to the diplomatic protection squad in , after his managers determined his relationship with diana had been inappropriate. diana later commenced a relationship with major james hewitt, the familys former riding instructor.charles and dianas evident discomfort in each others company led to them being dubbed the glums by the press. diana exposed charless affair with parker bowles in a book by andrew morton, diana her true story. audio tapes of her own extramarital flirtations also surfaced, as did persistent suggestions that hewitt is prince harrys father, based on a physical similarity between hewitt and harry. however, harry had already been born by the time dianas affair with hewitt began.in december , john major announced the couples legal separation in the house of commons. early the following year, the british press published transcripts of a passionate, bugged telephone conversation between charles and parker bowles that had taken place in , which was dubbed camillagate and tampongate. charles subsequently sought public understanding in a television film with dimbleby, charles the private man, the public role, broadcast on  june . in an interview in the film, charles confirmed his own extramarital affair with parker bowles, saying that he had rekindled their association in , only after his marriage to diana had irretrievably broken down. this was followed by dianas own admission of marital troubles in an interview on the bbc current affairs show panorama, broadcast on  november . referring to charless relationship with parker bowles, she said, well, there were three of us in this marriage. so, it was a bit crowded. she also expressed doubt about her husbands suitability for kingship. charles and diana divorced on  august , after being advised by the queen in december  to end the marriage. the couple shared custody of their children.diana was killed in a car crash in paris on  august . charles flew to paris with dianas sisters to accompany her body back to britain. in , dianas butler paul burrell published a note that he claimed had been written by diana in , in which there were allegations that charles was planning an accident in dianas car, brake failure and serious head injury, so that he could marry again. when questioned by the metropolitan police inquiry team as a part of operation paget, charles told the authorities that he did not know about his former wifes note from  and could not understand why she had those feelings.

the engagement of the prince of wales and camilla parker bowles was announced on  february .  the queens consent to the marriage  as required by the royal marriages act   was recorded in a privy council meeting on  march. in canada, the department of justice determined the consent of the queens privy council for canada was not required, as the union would not produce any heirs to the canadian throne.charles was the only member of the royal family to have a civil, rather than a church, wedding in england. british government documents from the s and s, published by the bbc, stated that such a marriage was illegal; these claims were dismissed by charless spokesman and explained by the sitting government to have been repealed by the registration service act .the union was scheduled to take place in a civil ceremony at windsor castle, with a subsequent religious blessing at the castles st georges chapel. the wedding venue was changed to windsor guildhall after it was realised a civil marriage at windsor castle would oblige the venue to be available to anyone who wished to be married there. four days before the event, it was postponed from the originally scheduled date of  april until the following day in order to allow charles and some of the invited dignitaries to attend the funeral of pope john paul ii.charless parents did not attend the marriage ceremony; the queens reluctance to attend possibly arose from her position as supreme governor of the church of england. the queen and duke of edinburgh did attend the service of blessing and held a reception for the newlyweds at windsor castle. the blessing by archbishop of canterbury rowan williams was televised.

in , charles undertook his first public engagement by attending a student garden party at the palace of holyroodhouse. during his time as prince of wales, he undertook official duties on behalf of the queen, completing , engagements between  and . he officiated at investitures and attended the funerals of foreign dignitaries. charles made regular tours of wales, fulfilling a week of engagements each summer, and attending important national occasions, such as opening the senedd. the six trustees of the royal collection trust met three times a year under his chairmanship. charles also represented his mother at the independence celebrations in fiji in , the bahamas in , papua new guinea in , zimbabwe in , and brunei in .in , christopher john lewis, who had fired a shot with a . rifle at the queen in , attempted to escape a psychiatric hospital in order to assassinate charles, who was visiting new zealand with diana and william. while charles was visiting australia on australia day in january , david kang fired two shots at him from a starting pistol in protest of the treatment of several hundred cambodian asylum seekers held in detention camps. in , charles became the first member of the royal family to visit the republic of ireland in an official capacity. in , charles represented the queen at the hong kong handover ceremony.

at the funeral of pope john paul ii in , charles caused controversy when he shook hands with the president of zimbabwe, robert mugabe, who had been seated next to him. charless office subsequently released a statement saying that he could not avoid shaking mugabes hand and that he finds the current zimbabwean regime abhorrent.charles represented the queen at the opening ceremony of the  commonwealth games in delhi, india. in november , he and camilla were indirectly involved in student protests when their car was attacked by protesters. from  to  november , he represented the queen for the first time at a commonwealth heads of government meeting, in colombo, sri lanka.charles and camilla made their first joint trip to the republic of ireland in may . the trip was called an important step in promoting peace and reconciliation by the british embassy. during the trip, charles shook hands in galway with gerry adams, leader of sinn fin and widely believed to be the leader of the ira, the militant group that had assassinated lord mountbatten in . the event was described by the media as a historic handshake and a significant moment for angloirish relations.

commonwealth heads of government decided at their  meeting that charles would be the next head of the commonwealth after the queen. the head is chosen and therefore not hereditary. in march , at the request of the british government, charles and camilla went on an official tour of cuba, making them the first british royals to visit the country. the tour was seen as an effort to form a closer relationship between cuba and the uk.charles contracted covid during the pandemic in march . several newspapers were critical that charles and camilla were tested promptly at a time when many nhs doctors, nurses and patients had been unable to be tested expeditiously. he tested positive for covid for a second time in february . he and camilla, who also tested positive, had received doses of a covid vaccine in february .

charles attended the november  ceremonies to mark barbadoss transition into a parliamentary republic, abolishing the position of monarch of barbados. he was invited by prime minister mia mottley as the future head of the commonwealth; it was the first time that a member of the royal family attended the transition of a realm to a republic. in may of the following year, charles attended the state opening of the british parliament, delivering the queens speech on behalf of his mother, as a counsellor of state.

charles acceded to the british throne on his mothers death on  september . he was the longestserving british heir apparent, having surpassed edward viis record of  years on  april . when he became monarch at the age of , charles was the oldest person to do so, the previous record holder being william iv, who was  when he became king in .charles gave his first speech to the nation at  pm on  september, in which he paid tribute to his mother and announced the appointment of his elder son, william, as prince of wales. the following day, the accession council publicly proclaimed charles as king, the ceremony being televised for the first time. attendees included the new queen consort, camilla; william, prince of wales; and the prime minister, liz truss, along with her six living predecessors. the proclamation was also read out by local authorities around the united kingdom. other realms signed and read their own proclamations, as did scotland, wales, northern ireland, british overseas territories, crown dependencies, canadian provinces, and australian states.

charles and camillas coronation took place at westminster abbey on  may . plans had been made for many years, under the code name operation golden orb. reports before his accession suggested that charless coronation would be simpler than his mothers in , with the ceremony expected to be shorter, smaller, less expensive, and more representative of different faiths and community groups  falling in line with the kings wish to reflect the ethnic diversity of modern britain. nonetheless, the coronation was a church of england rite, including the coronation oath, the anointment, delivery of the orb, and enthronement. in july they attended a national service of thanksgiving where they were presented with the honours of scotland in st giles cathedral.charles and camilla have engaged in two state visits and received one in return. in november  they hosted the south african president, cyril ramaphosa, during the first official state visit to britain of charless reign. in march the following year, the king and queen embarked on a state visit to germany; charles became the first british monarch to address the bundestag. similarly, in september, he became the first british monarch to give a speech from frances senate chamber during his state visit to the country.

since founding the princes trust in , using his , of severance pay from the navy, charles has established  more charitable organisations and now serves as president of each. together, they form a loose alliance, the princes charities, which describes itself as the largest multicause charitable enterprise in the united kingdom, raising over  million annually ... and is active across a broad range of areas including education and young people, environmental sustainability, the built environment, responsible business and enterprise, and international. as prince of wales, charles became patron or president of over  other charities and organisations.the princes charities canada was established in , in a similar fashion to its namesake in britain. charles uses his tours of canada as a way to help draw attention to youth, the disabled, the environment, the arts, medicine, the elderly, heritage conservation, and education. charles has also set up the princes charities australia, based in melbourne, to provide a coordinating presence for his australian and international charitable endeavours.

charles has supported humanitarian projects; for example, he and his sons took part in ceremonies that marked the  international day for the elimination of racial discrimination. charles was one of the first public figures to express strong concerns about the human rights record of the romanian dictator nicolae ceauescu, initiating objections in the international arena, and subsequently supported the fara foundation, a charity for romanian orphans and abandoned children.

two of charless charities, the princes foundation and the prince of waless charitable fund, came under scrutiny in  and  for accepting donations the media deemed inappropriate. in august , it was announced that the princes foundation was launching an investigation into the reports, with charless support. the charity commission also launched an investigation into allegations that the donations meant for the princes foundation had been instead sent to the mahfouz foundation. in february , the metropolitan police launched an investigation into the cashforhonours allegations linked to the foundation, passing their evidence to the crown prosecution service for deliberation on  october. in august , the metropolitan police announced that they had concluded their investigations and no further actions would be taken.the times reported in june  that, between  and , charles accepted  million in cash from qatari prime minister hamad bin jassim bin jaber al thani. there was no evidence that the payments were illegal or that it was not intended for the money to go to the charity, although, the charity commission stated it would review the information and announced in july  that there would be no further investigation. in the same month, the times reported that the prince of waless charitable fund received a donation of  million from bakr bin laden and shafiq bin laden  both halfbrothers of osama bin laden  during a private meeting in . the charity commission described the decision to accept donations as a matter for trustees and added that no investigation was required.

from young adulthood, charles encouraged understanding of indigenous voices, claiming they held crucial messages about preservation of the land, respecting community and shared values, resolving conflict, and recognising and making good on past iniquities. charles dovetailed this view with his efforts against climate change, as well as reconciliation between indigenous and nonindigenous peoples and his charitable work in canada. at chogm , charles, who was representing the queen, raised that reconciliation process as an example for dealing with the history of slavery in the british empire, for which he expressed his sorrow.letters sent by charles to government ministers in  and  expressing his concerns over various policy issues  the socalled black spider memos  presented potential embarrassment following a challenge by the guardian newspaper to release the letters under the freedom of information act . in march , the supreme court of the united kingdom decided that charless letters must be released and the letters were published by the cabinet office on  may. the reaction was largely supportive of charles, with little criticism of him; the press variously described the memos as underwhelming and harmless, and concluded that their release had backfired on those who seek to belittle him. it was revealed in the same year that charles had access to confidential cabinet papers.

in october , a letter sent by charles to australian governorgeneral john kerr, after kerrs dismissal of prime minister gough whitlam in , was released as part of the collection of palace letters regarding the australian constitutional crisis. in the letter, charles was supportive of kerrs decision, writing that what kerr did last year was right and the courageous thing to do.the times reported in june  that charles had privately described the british governments rwanda asylum plan as appalling and he feared that it would overshadow the commonwealth heads of government meeting in rwanda that same month. it was later claimed that cabinet ministers had warned charles to avoid making political comments, as they feared a constitutional crisis could arise if he continued to make such statements once he became king.

charles has openly expressed his views on architecture and urban planning; he fostered the advancement of new classical architecture and asserted that he cares deeply about issues such as the environment, architecture, innercity renewal, and the quality of life. in a speech given for the th anniversary of the royal institute of british architects on  may , he described a proposed extension to the national gallery in london as a monstrous carbuncle on the face of a muchloved friend and deplored the glass stumps and concrete towers of modern architecture. charles called for local community involvement in architectural choices and asked, why has everything got to be vertical, straight, unbending, only at right angles  and functional charles has a deep understanding of islamic art and architecture and has been involved in the construction of a building and garden at the oxford centre for islamic studies, which combine islamic and oxford architectural styles.

in charless  book a vision of britain, and in speeches and essays, he has been critical of modern architecture, arguing that traditional designs and methods should guide contemporary ones. he has continued to campaign for traditional urbanism, human scale, restoration of historic buildings, and sustainable design despite criticism in the press. two of his charities  the princes regeneration trust and the princes foundation for building community, which were later merged into one charity  promote his views. the village of poundbury was built on land owned by the duchy of cornwall to a master plan by lon krier, under the guidance of charles and in line with his philosophy. in , developments for the suburb of nansledan began on the estate of the duchy of cornwall with charless endorsement. charles helped purchase dumfries house and its complete collection of th century furnishings in , taking a m loan from his charitable trust to contribute toward the m cost. the house and gardens remain property of the princes foundation and serve as a museum and community and skills training centre. this led to the development of knockroon, called the scottish poundbury.after lamenting in  the unbridled destruction of many of canadas historic urban cores, charles offered his assistance to the department of canadian heritage in creating a trust modelled on britains national trust, a plan that was implemented with the passage of the federal budget in . in , charles agreed to the use of his title for the prince of wales prize for municipal heritage leadership, awarded by the national trust for canada to municipal governments that have committed to the conservation of historic places.whilst visiting the us and surveying the damage caused by hurricane katrina, charles received the national building museums vincent scully prize in  for his efforts in regard to architecture; he donated , of the prize money towards restoring stormdamaged communities. for his work as patron of new classical architecture, charles was awarded the  driehaus architecture prize from the university of notre dame. the worshipful company of carpenters installed charles as an honorary liveryman in recognition of his interest in londons architecture.charles has occasionally intervened in projects that employ architectural styles such as modernism and functionalism. in , charles wrote to the qatari royal family  the financier of the redevelopment of the chelsea barracks site  labelling lord rogerss design for the site unsuitable. rogers claimed that charles had also intervened to block his designs for the royal opera house and paternoster square. cpc group, the project developer, took a case against qatari diar to the high court. after the suit was settled, the cpc group apologised to charles for any offence caused ... during the course of the proceedings.

since the s, charles has promoted environmental awareness. at the age of , he delivered his first speech on environmental issues in his capacity as the chairman of the welsh countryside committee. an avid gardener, charles has also emphasised the importance of talking to plants, stating that i happily talk to the plants and trees, and listen to them. i think its absolutely crucial. his interest in gardening began in  when he took over the highgrove estate. his healing garden, based on sacred geometry and ancient religious symbolism, went on display at the chelsea flower show in .upon moving into highgrove house, charles developed an interest in organic farming, which culminated in the  launch of his own organic brand, duchy originals, which sells more than  different sustainably produced products; the profits  are donated to the princes charities. charles became involved with farming and various industries within it, regularly meeting with farmers to discuss their trade. a prominent critic of the practice, charles has also spoken against the use of gm crops, and in a letter to tony blair in , charles criticised the development of genetically modified foods.the sustainable markets initiative  a project that encourages putting sustainability at the centre of all activities  was launched by charles at the world economic forums annual meeting in davos in january . in may of the same year, the initiative and the world economic forum initiated the great reset project, a fivepoint plan concerned with enhancing sustainable economic growth following the global recession caused by the covid pandemic.

as early as , charles was questioning meat consumption. in the  royal special television programme, he told host alastair burnet that i actually now dont eat as much meat as i used to. i eat more fish. he also pointed out the societal double standard whereby eating meat is not questioned but eating less meat means all hell seems to break loose. in , charles spoke to the bbc about the environment and revealed that, two days per week, he eats no meat nor fish and, one day per week, he eats no dairy products. in , it was reported that charles eats a breakfast of fruit salad, seeds, and tea. he does not eat lunch, but takes a break for tea at  p.m. and eats dinner at  p.m., returning to work until midnight or after. ahead of christmas dinner in , charles confirmed to animal rights group peta that foie gras would not be served at any royal residences; he had stopped the use of foie gras at his own properties for more than a decade before taking the throne. during a september  state banquet at the palace of versailles, it was reported that charles did not want foie gras or outofseason asparagus on the menu. instead he was served lobster. charles does not like chocolate, coffee, or garlic.the holy chrism oil used at his coronation was vegan, made from oils of olive, sesame, rose, jasmine, cinnamon, neroli, and benzoin, along with amber and orange blossom. his mothers chrism oil contained animalbased oils.charles delivered a speech at the  g rome summit, describing cop as the last chance saloon for preventing climate change and asking for actions that would lead to a greenled, sustainable economy. in his speech at the opening ceremony for cop, he repeated his sentiments from the previous year, stating that a vast militarystyle campaign was needed to marshal the strength of the global private sector for tackling climate change.charles, who is patron of the cambridge institute for sustainability leadership, introduced the climate action scholarships for students from small island nations in partnership with university of cambridge, university of toronto, university of melbourne, mcmaster university, and university of montreal in march . in , the media alleged that truss had advised charles against attending cop, to which advice he agreed. in  he funded the princes countryside fund , a charity which aims for a confident, robust and sustainable agricultural and rural community.

charles has controversially championed alternative medicine. he first publicly expressed his interest in the topic in december , in an address to the british medical association. this speech was seen as combative and critical of modern medicine and was met with anger by some medical professionals. similarly, the princes foundation for integrated health  attracted opposition from the scientific and medical community over its campaign encouraging general practitioners to offer herbal and other alternative treatments to nhs patients.in april , the times published a letter from edzard ernst, professor of complementary medicine at the university of exeter, which asked the fih to recall two guides promoting alternative medicine. that year, ernst published a book with simon singh called trick or treatment alternative medicine on trial and mockingly dedicated to hrh the prince of wales. the last chapter is highly critical of charless advocacy of complementary and alternative treatments.charless duchy originals produced a variety of complementary medicinal products, including a detox tincture that ernst denounced as financially exploiting the vulnerable and outright quackery. charles personally wrote at least seven letters to the medicines and healthcare products regulatory agency shortly before it relaxed the rules governing labelling of such herbal products, a move that was widely condemned by scientists and medical bodies. it was reported in october  that charles had lobbied the health secretary, andy burnham, regarding greater provision of alternative treatments in the nhs.following accounting irregularities, the fih announced its closure in april . the fih was rebranded and relaunched later in the year as the college of medicine, of which charles became a patron in .

from his youth until , charles was an avid player of competitive polo. charles also frequently took part in fox hunting until the sport was banned in the united kingdom in . by the late s, opposition to the activity was growing when charless participation was viewed as a political statement by those who were opposed to it.charles has been a keen salmon angler since youth and supported orri vigfssons efforts to protect the north atlantic salmon. he frequently fishes the river dee in aberdeenshire, scotland, and claims his most special angling memories are from his time spent in vopnafjrur, iceland. charles is a supporter of burnley f.c..apart from hunting, charles has also participated in target rifle competitions, representing the house of lords in the vizianagram match  at bisley. he became president of the british national rifle association in .

charles has been involved in performance since his youth, and appeared in sketches and revues while studying at cambridge.

charles is president or patron of more than  performing arts organisations, including the royal college of music, royal opera, english chamber orchestra, philharmonia orchestra, welsh national opera, royal shakespeare company , british film institute, and purcell school. in , he revived the tradition of appointing an official harpist to the prince of wales, in order to foster welsh talent at playing the national instrument of wales.charles is a keen watercolourist, having published books on the subject and exhibited and sold a number of his works to raise money for charity; in , it was estimated that he had sold lithographs of his watercolours for a total of  million from a shop at his highgrove house residence. for his th birthday,  of his watercolours were exhibited at hampton court palace and, for his th birthday, his works were exhibited at the national gallery of australia. in ,  lithographs of his watercolour paintings illustrating his country estates were exhibited at the florence international biennale of contemporary art and  of his paintings were put on display in london in . to mark the th anniversary of his investiture as prince of wales in , the royal mail issued a series of postage stamps that featured his paintings. charles is honorary president of the royal academy of arts development trust and, in , , and , commissioned paintings of  dday veterans, seven holocaust survivors, and ten members of the windrush generation, respectively, which went on display at the queens gallery in buckingham palace.charles is the author of several books and has contributed a foreword or preface to numerous books by others. he has also written, presented, or been featured in a variety of documentary films.

shortly after his accession to the throne, charles publicly described himself as a committed anglican christian; at age , during easter , he had been confirmed into the anglican communion by archbishop of canterbury michael ramsey in st georges chapel, windsor castle. the king is the supreme governor of the church of england and a member of the church of scotland; charles swore an oath to uphold that church immediately after he was proclaimed king. he attends services at various anglican churches close to highgrove and attends the church of scotlands crathie kirk with the rest of the royal family when staying at balmoral castle.

laurens van der post became a friend of charles in ; he was dubbed the princes spiritual guru and was godfather to prince william. from van der post, charles developed a focus on philosophy and an interest in other religions. charles expressed his philosophical views in his  book, harmony a new way of looking at our world, which won a nautilus book award. he has also visited eastern orthodox monasteries on mount athos, in romania, and in serbia, and met with eastern church leaders in jerusalem in , during a visit that culminated in an ecumenical service in the church of the nativity in bethlehem and a walk through the city accompanied by christian and muslim dignitaries. charles also attended the consecration of britains first syriac orthodox cathedral, st thomas cathedral, acton. charles is patron of the oxford centre for islamic studies at the university of oxford and attended the inauguration of the markfield institute of higher education, which is dedicated to islamic studies in a multicultural context.in his  documentary with dimbleby, charles said that, when king, he wished to be seen as a defender of faith, rather than the british monarchs traditional title of defender of the faith, preferring to embrace all religious traditions and the pattern of the divine, which i think is in all of us. this attracted controversy at the time, as well as speculation that the coronation oath might be altered. he stated in  that he would retain the title of defender of the faith, whilst ensuring that other peoples faiths can also be practised, which he sees as a duty of the church of england. charles reaffirmed this theme shortly after his accession and declared that his duties as sovereign included the duty to protect the diversity of our country, including by protecting the space for faith itself and its practice through the religions, cultures, traditions, and beliefs to which our hearts and minds direct us as individuals. his inclusive, multifaith approach and his own christian beliefs were expressed in his first christmas message as king.

since his birth, charles has received close media attention, which increased as he matured. it has been an ambivalent relationship, largely impacted by his marriages to diana and camilla and their aftermath, but also centred on his future conduct as king.

described as the worlds most eligible bachelor in the late s, charles was subsequently overshadowed by diana. after her death, the media regularly breached charless privacy and printed exposs. known for expressing his opinions, when asked during an interview to mark his th birthday whether this would continue in the same way once he is king, he responded no. it wont. im not that stupid. i do realise that it is a separate exercise being sovereign. so, of course, you know, i understand entirely how that should operate.a  bmg research poll found that  per cent of britons wanted charles to abdicate immediately on his mothers death, in favour of william. however, a  opinion poll reported that  per cent of the british public had a favourable opinion of him. on his accession to the throne, the statesman reported an opinion poll that put charless popularity with the british people at  per cent. more recent polling suggested that his popularity increased sharply after he became king. according to yougov, as of april , charles had an approval rating of  per cent.

in , german tabloid bild published nude photos of charles that were taken while he was vacationing in le barroux; they had reportedly been put up for sale for ,. buckingham palace reacted by stating that it was unjustifiable for anybody to suffer this sort of intrusion.charles, so often a target of the press, got his chance to return fire in , when addressing scores of editors, publishers, and other media executives gathered at st brides fleet street to celebrate  years of journalism. defending public servants from the corrosive drip of constant criticism, he noted that the press had been awkward, cantankerous, cynical, bloodyminded, at times intrusive, at times inaccurate, and at times deeply unfair and harmful to individuals and to institutions. but, he concluded, regarding his own relations with the press, from time to time we are probably both a bit hard on each other, exaggerating the downsides and ignoring the good points in each.

in , charles filed a court case against the mail on sunday, after excerpts of his personal journals were published, revealing his opinions on matters such as the transfer of sovereignty over hong kong to china in , in which charles described the chinese government officials as appalling old waxworks. charles and camilla were named in  as individuals whose confidential information was reportedly targeted or actually acquired in conjunction with the news media phone hacking scandal.the independent noted in  that charles would only speak to broadcasters on the condition they have signed a page contract, demanding that clarence house attends both the rough cut and fine cut edits of films and, if it is unhappy with the final product, can remove the contribution in its entirety from the programme. this contract stipulated that all questions directed at charles must be preapproved and vetted by his representatives.

in , the guardian estimated charless personal wealth at . billion. this estimate includes the assets of the duchy of lancaster worth  million , jewels worth  million, real estate worth  million, shares and investments worth  million, a stamp collection worth at least  million, racehorses worth  million, artworks worth  million, and cars worth . million. most of this wealth which charles inherited from his mother is exempt from inheritance tax.clarence house, previously the residence of the queen mother, was charless official london residence from , after being renovated at a cost of . million. he previously shared apartments eight and nine at kensington palace with diana before moving to york house at st jamess palace, which remained his principal residence until . highgrove house in gloucestershire is owned by the duchy of cornwall, having been purchased for charless use in , and which he rented for , per annum. since william became the duke of cornwall, charles is expected to pay , per annum for use of the property. charles also owns a property near the village of viscri in romania.as prince of wales, charless primary source of income was generated from the duchy of cornwall, which owns , acres of land , including farming, residential, and commercial properties, as well as an investment portfolio. since , charles has paid tax voluntarily under the memorandum of understanding on royal taxation, updated in . her majestys revenue and customs were asked in december  to investigate alleged tax avoidance by the duchy of cornwall. the duchy is named in the paradise papers, a set of confidential electronic documents relating to offshore investment that were leaked to the german newspaper sddeutsche zeitung.

charles has held many titles and honorary military positions throughout the commonwealth, is sovereign of many orders in his own countries and has received honours and awards from around the world. in each of his realms, he has a distinct title that follows a similar formula king of saint lucia and of his other realms and territories in saint lucia, king of australia and his other realms and territories in australia, etc. in the isle of man, which is a crown dependency rather than a separate realm, he is known as lord of mann. charles is also styled defender of the faith.

there had been speculation throughout elizabeth iis reign as to what regnal name charles would choose upon his accession; instead of charles iii, he could have chosen to reign as george vii or used one of his other given names. it was reported that he might use george in honour of his grandfather george vi and to avoid associations with previous controversial kings named charles. charless office asserted in  that no decision had yet been made. speculation continued for a few hours following his mothers death, until liz truss announced and clarence house confirmed that charles would use the regnal name charles iii.charles, who left active military service in , was awarded the highest rank in all three armed services in  by queen elizabeth ii field marshal, admiral of the fleet, and marshal of the royal air force.

as prince of wales, charless coat of arms was based on the arms of the united kingdom, differenced with a white label and an inescutcheon of the principality of wales, surmounted by the heir apparents crown, and with the motto ich dien  instead of dieu et mon droit.

when charles became king, he inherited the royal coats of arms of the united kingdom and of canada. the design of his royal cypher, featuring a depiction of the tudor crown instead of st edwards crown, was revealed on  september . according to the college of arms, the tudor crown will now be used in representations of the royal arms of the united kingdom and on uniforms and crown badges.

the banners used by charles as prince of wales varied depending upon location. his personal standard for the united kingdom was the royal standard of the united kingdom differenced as in his arms, with a label of three points argent and the escutcheon of the arms of the principality of wales in the centre. it was used outside wales, scotland, cornwall, and canada, and throughout the entire united kingdom when charles was acting in an official capacity associated with the british armed forces.the personal flag for use in wales was based upon the royal badge of wales. in scotland, the personal banner used between  and  was based upon three ancient scottish titles duke of rothesay , high steward of scotland, and lord of the isles. in cornwall, the banner was the arms of the duke of cornwall.in , the canadian heraldic authority introduced a personal heraldic banner for the prince of wales for canada, consisting of the shield of the royal coat of arms of canada defaced with both a blue roundel of the prince of waless feathers surrounded by a wreath of gold maple leaves and a white label of three points.

the royal standard of the united kingdom is used to represent the king in the united kingdom and on official visits overseas, except in canada. it is the royal arms in banner form undifferentiated, having been used by successive british monarchs since . the royal standard of canada is used by the king in canada and while acting on behalf of canada overseas. it is the escutcheon of the royal coat of arms of canada in banner form undifferentiated.

cristiano ronaldo dos santos aveiro   is a portuguese professional footballer who plays as a forward for and captains both saudi pro league club al nassr and the portugal national team. widely regarded as one of the greatest players of all time, ronaldo has won five ballon dor awards, a record three uefa best player in europe, and four european golden shoes, the most by a european player. he has won  trophies in his career, including seven league titles, five uefa champions leagues, the uefa european championship and the uefa nations league. ronaldo holds the records for most appearances , goals  and assists  in the champions league, goals in the european championship , international goals  and international appearances . he is one of the few players to have made over , professional career appearances, and has scored over  official senior career goals for club and country, making him the top goalscorer of all time.

ronaldo began his senior career with sporting cp, before signing with manchester united in , winning the fa cup in his first season. he would also go on to win three consecutive premier league titles, the champions league and the fifa club world cup; at age , he won his first ballon dor. ronaldo was the subject of the thenmost expensive association football transfer when he signed for real madrid in  in a transfer worth  million . he became a key contributor and formed an attacking trio with karim benzema and gareth bale which was integral to the team winning four champions leagues from  to , including la dcima. during this period, he won backtoback ballons dor in  and , and again in  and , and was runnerup three times behind lionel messi, his perceived career rival. he also became the clubs alltime top goalscorer and the alltime top scorer in the champions league, and finished as the competitions top scorer for six consecutive seasons between  and . with real, ronaldo won four champions leagues, two la liga titles, two copas del rey, two uefa super cups and three club world cups. in , he signed for juventus in a transfer worth an initial  million , the most expensive transfer for an italian club and for a player over  years old. he won two serie a titles, two supercoppa italiana trophies and a coppa italia, became the inaugural serie a most valuable player and became the first footballer to finish as top scorer in the english, spanish and italian leagues. he returned to manchester united in , finishing his only full season as the clubs top scorer, before his contract was terminated in . in , he signed for al nassr.

ronaldo made his international debut for portugal in  at the age of  and has since earned more than  caps, making him both the country and historys mostcapped player of all time, recognised by the guinness world records. with more than  goals at international level, he is also the sports alltime top goalscorer. ronaldo has played in and scored at eleven major tournaments; he scored his first international goal at euro , where he helped portugal reach the final. he assumed captaincy of the national team in july . in , ronaldo was named the best portuguese player of all time by the portuguese football federation. the following year, he led portugal to their first major tournament title at euro , and received the silver boot as the secondhighest goalscorer of the tournament. this achievement would see him receive his fourth ballon dor. he also led them to victory in the inaugural uefa nations league in , receiving the top scorer award in the finals, and later received the golden boot as top scorer of euro .

one of the worlds most marketable and famous athletes, ronaldo was ranked the worlds highestpaid athlete by forbes in , , and , and the worlds most famous athlete by espn from  to . time included him on their list of the  most influential people in the world in . he is the first footballer and the third sportsman to earn us billion in his career.

cristiano ronaldo dos santos aveiro was born on  february  in the so pedro parish of funchal, the capital of the portuguese island of madeira, and grew up in the nearby parish of santo antnio. he is the fourth and youngest child of maria dolores dos santos viveiros da aveiro, a cook, and jos dinis aveiro, a municipal gardener and parttime kit man. his greatgrandmother on his fathers side, isabel da piedade, was from the island of so vicente, cape verde. he has one older brother, hugo, and two older sisters, elma and liliana ctia katia. he was named after actor and u.s. president ronald reagan, whom his father was a fan of. his mother revealed that she wanted to abort him due to poverty, his fathers alcoholism, and having too many children already, but her doctor refused to perform the procedure, as abortions were illegal in portugal at that time. ronaldo grew up in an impoverished roman catholic home, sharing a room with all his siblings.as a child, ronaldo played for andorinha from  to , where his father was the kit man, and later spent two years with nacional. in , aged , he went on a threeday trial with sporting cp, who signed him for a fee of ,. he subsequently moved from madeira to alcochete, near lisbon, to join sportings youth academy. by age , ronaldo believed he had the ability to play semiprofessionally and agreed with his mother to cease his education to focus entirely on football. with a troubled life as a student and living in lisbon area away from his madeiran family, he did not complete schooling beyond the th grade. while popular with other students at school, he had been expelled after throwing a chair at his teacher, who he said had disrespected him. one year later, he was diagnosed with tachycardia, a condition that could have forced him to give up playing football. ronaldo underwent heart surgery where a laser was used to cauterise multiple cardiac pathways into one, altering his resting heart rate. he was discharged from the hospital hours after the procedure and resumed training a few days later. in , cristiano ronaldos mother, dolores aveiro, stated in an interview for sporting cps official television channel  that her son would be a bricklayer if he hadnt become a professional football player.

at age , ronaldo was promoted from sportings youth team by firstteam manager lszl blni, who was impressed with his dribbling. he subsequently became the first player to play for the clubs under, under and under teams, the b team and the first team, all within a single season. sporting cp b was the st team in his senior career, where he debuted in a  away loss against sport clube lusitnia on  september , in a game for the segunda diviso b championship played in the azores. on  september , ronaldo made his debut in the primeira liga, playing for sporting cps main team against braga, and on  october, he scored two goals against moreirense in their  win. over the course of the  season, his representatives suggested the player to liverpool manager grard houllier and barcelona president joan laporta. manager arsne wenger, who was interested in signing ronaldo, met with him at arsenals stadium in november to discuss a possible transfer.manchester united manager alex ferguson was determined to acquire ronaldo on a permanent move urgently, after sporting defeated united  at the inauguration of the estdio jos alvalade in august . initially, united had planned to sign ronaldo and loan him back to sporting for a year. having been impressed by him, the united players urged ferguson to sign him. after the game, ferguson agreed to pay sporting . million for what he considered to be one of the most exciting young players he had ever seen. a decade after his departure from the club, in april , sporting honoured ronaldo by selecting him to become their ,th member.

ronaldos move to manchester united was completed on  august , too late for the  fa community shield but in time for their game against bolton wanderers on the opening day of the  season, and made him the first portuguese player to sign for the club. his transfer fee made him, at the time, the most expensive teenager in english football history. although he requested the number , his number at sporting, he received the squad number  shirt, which had previously been worn by such united players as george best, eric cantona and david beckham. wearing the number  became an extra source of motivation for ronaldo. a key element in his development during his time in england proved to be ferguson, of whom he later said hes been my father in sport, one of the most important and influential factors in my career.

ronaldo made his debut as a substitute in a  home win over bolton wanderers in the premier league on  august , and received a standing ovation when he came on for nicky butt. his performance earned praise from best, who hailed it as undoubtedly the most exciting debut he had ever seen. ronaldo scored his first goal for manchester united with a freekick in a  win over portsmouth on  november. three more league goals followed in the second half of the campaign, the last of which came against aston villa on the final day of the season, a match in which he also received the first red card of his career. ronaldo ended his first season in english football by scoring the opening goal in uniteds  win over millwall in the  fa cup final, earning his first trophy. bbc pundit alan hansen described him as the star of the final. the british press had been critical of ronaldo during the season for his elaborate stepovers in trying to beat opponents, but teammate gary neville said he was not a show pony, but the real thing, and predicted he would become a worldclass player.

ronaldo scored uniteds ,th premier league goal on  october , their only goal in a  loss to middlesbrough. a few weeks later, he signed a new contract with the club that extended his previous deal by two years to . at the start of , ronaldo played two of his best matches of the  season, producing a goal and an assist against aston villa and scoring twice against rivals arsenal. he played the full  minutes of the  fa cup final against arsenal, which ended in a goalless draw; although ronaldo scored his attempt in the penalty shootout, united lost . ronaldo won his second trophy in english football, the football league cup, after scoring the third goal in uniteds  final win over wigan athletic.during his third season in england, ronaldo was involved in several incidents. he had a onematch ban imposed on him by uefa for a onefingered gesture towards benfica fans, and was sent off in the manchester derby  for kicking manchester citys former united player andy cole. ronaldo clashed with a teammate, striker ruud van nistelrooy, who took offence at the wingers showboating style of play. following the  fifa world cup, in which he was involved in an incident where club teammate wayne rooney was sent off, ronaldo publicly asked for a transfer, lamenting the lack of support he felt he had received from the club over the incident. united denied the possibility of him leaving the club.although his world cup altercation with rooney resulted in ronaldo being booed throughout the  season, it proved to be his breakout year, as he broke the goal barrier for the first time and won his first premier league title. an important factor in this success was his onetoone training by firstteam coach ren meulensteen, who taught him to make himself more unpredictable, improve his teamwork, call for the ball and capitalise on goalscoring opportunities rather than waiting for the chance to score the aesthetically pleasing goals for which he was already known. he scored three consecutive braces at the end of december, against aston villa , wigan and reading. ronaldo was named the premier league player of the month in november and december, becoming only the third player to receive consecutive honours.

at the quarterfinal stage of the  uefa champions league, ronaldo scored his first goals in his th match in the competition, scoring twice in a  win over roma. he subsequently scored four minutes into the first semifinal leg against milan, which ended in a  win, but was marked out of the second leg as united lost  at the san siro. he also helped united reach the  fa cup final, but the final against chelsea ended in a  defeat. ronaldo scored the only goal in the manchester derby on  may , as united won their first league title in four years. as a result of his performances, he amassed a host of personal awards for the season. he won the professional footballers associations players player, fans player and young player of the year awards, as well as the football writers associations footballer of the year award, becoming the first player to win all four main pfa and fwa honours. his wages were raised to , a week as part of a fiveyear contract extension. ronaldo was named runnerup to kak for the  ballon dor, and came third, behind kak and lionel messi, in the running for the  fifa world player of the year award.ronaldo scored his first hattrick for united in a  win against newcastle united on  january , which put united top of the league table. on  march, he captained united for the first time in a home win over bolton and scored both goals in a  win. his second goal was his rd of the campaign, surpassing george bests total of  goals in the  season, setting the clubs new singleseason record by a midfielder. his  league goals earned him the premier league golden boot, as well as the european golden shoe, which made him the first winger to win the latter award. he additionally received the pfa players player of the year and fwa footballer of the year awards for the second consecutive season. in the knockout stage of the champions league, ronaldo scored the decisive goal against lyon to help united advance to the quarterfinals  on aggregate; while playing as a striker, he scored with a header in the  aggregate win over roma. united reached the final against chelsea in moscow on  may, where, despite his opening goal being negated by an equaliser and his penalty kick being saved in the shootout, united emerged victorious , winning the penalties . as the champions league top scorer, ronaldo was named the uefa club footballer of the year.ronaldo scored a total of  goals in all competitions during the  season, his most prolific campaign during his time in england. he missed three matches after headbutting a portsmouth player at the start of the season, an experience he said taught him not to let opponents provoke him. as rumours circulated of ronaldos interest in moving to real madrid, united filed a tampering complaint with governing body fifa over madrids alleged pursuit of their player, but they declined to take action. fifa president sepp blatter asserted that the player should be allowed to leave his club, describing the situation as modern slavery. despite ronaldo publicly agreeing with blatter, he remained at united for another year.

ahead of the  season, on  july, ronaldo underwent ankle surgery, which kept him out of action for  weeks. following his return, he scored his th goal in all competitions for united with the first of two free kicks in a  win against stoke city on  november, which meant he had now scored against all  opposition teams in the premier league at the time. at the close of , ronaldo helped united win the  fifa club world cup in japan, assisting the finalwinning goal against liga de quito and winning the silver ball in the process. with his  ballon dor and  fifa world player of the year, ronaldo became uniteds first ballon dor winner since best in , and the first premier league player to be named the fifa world player of the year.his matchwinning goal in the second leg against porto, a yard strike, earned him the inaugural fifa pusks award, presented by fifa in recognition of the best goal of the year; he later called it the best goal he had ever scored. united advanced to the final in rome, where he made little impact in uniteds  defeat to barcelona. ronaldo ended his time in england with nine trophies, as united claimed their third successive league title and a football league cup. he finished the campaign with  goals in all competitions,  goals fewer than the previous season, in four more appearances. his final goal for united came on  may  with a free kick in the manchester derby at old trafford.

ahead of the  season, ronaldo joined real madrid for a world record transfer fee at the time of  million . his contract, which ran until , was worth  million per year and contained a  billion buyout clause. at least , fans attended his presentation at the santiago bernabu, surpassing the year record of , fans who had welcomed diego maradona at napoli. since club captain ral already wore the number  , ronaldo received the number  shirt, which was presented to him by former madrid player alfredo di stfano.

ronaldo made his la liga debut against deportivo la corua on  august, scoring a penalty in a  home win. he scored in each of his first four league games, the first madrid player to do so. his first champions league goals for the club followed with two free kicks in the first group match against zrich. his strong start to the season was interrupted when he suffered an ankle injury in october while on international duty, which kept him sidelined for seven weeks. a week after his return, he received his first red card in spain in a match against almera. midway through the season, ronaldo finished second in the  ballon dor and the  fifa world player of the year awards, behind messi. he finished the season with  goals in all competitions, including a hattrick in a  win against mallorca on  may , his first in la liga, and became real madrids highest goalscorer that season. although ronaldo helped amass a club record  points in the league, he did not win a trophy in his first season.following rals departure, ronaldo was given the number  shirt for madrid before the  season. his subsequent return to his ballon dorwinning form was epitomised when, for the first time in his career, he scored four goals in a single match during a  rout against racing santander on  october. ronaldo subsequently scored further hattricks against athletic bilbao, levante, villarreal and mlaga. despite his performances, he did not make the top three in the inaugural  fifa ballon dor. during a historic series of four clsicos against rivals barcelona in april , ronaldo scored twice to equal his personal record of  goals in all competitions. though he failed to score in either leg of the champions league semifinals as madrid were eliminated, he equalised from the penalty spot in the return league game and scored the matchwinning goal in the rd minute of the  copa del rey final, winning his first trophy in spain. his two goals in the last match of the season against almera made him the first player in la liga to score  goals. in addition to the pichichi trophy, ronaldo won the european golden shoe for a second time, becoming the first player to win the award in different leagues.

during the following season, ronaldo achieved a new personal best of  goals in all competitions. he finished as runnerup to messi for the  fifa ballon dor, after scoring hattricks against real zaragoza, rayo vallecano, mlaga, osasuna and sevilla, the last of which put madrid on top of the league by the seasons midway point. ronaldo found greater team success in the league, helping madrid win their first league title in four years with a record  points. following a hattrick against levante as madrid further increased their lead over barcelona, he scored his th league goal for madrid in a  win over real sociedad on  march , a milestone he reached in just  matches across three seasons, breaking the previous club record held by ferenc pusks. another hattrick in the madrid derby against atltico madrid brought his total to  league goals, equalling his record of the previous season. his final league goal of the season, against mallorca, took his total to  goals, four short of the new record set by messi, though he became the first player to score against all  opposition teams in a single la liga season.ronaldo began the  season by lifting the  supercopa de espaa, his third trophy in spain. with a goal in each leg, he helped madrid win the spanish super cup on away goals following a  aggregate draw against barcelona. although ronaldo publicly commented that he was unhappy with a professional issue within the club, prompted by his refusal to celebrate his th goal for madrid, his goalscoring rate did not suffer. after netting a hattrick, including two penalties, against deportivo, he scored his first hattrick in the champions league in a  win over ajax. four days later, he became the first player to score in six successive clsicos when he hit a brace in a  draw at camp nou. his performances again saw ronaldo voted second in the running for the  fifa ballon dor, behind fourtime winner messi.

following the  winter break, ronaldo captained madrid for the first time in an official match, scoring twice to lift man madrid to a  win over sociedad on  january. he subsequently became the first nonspanish player in  years to captain madrid in el clasico on  january, a match which also marked his th club appearance. three days prior, he had scored his th club goal as part of a perfect hattrick against getafe. he scored his th goal for madrid on  may in a  win against mlaga, reaching the landmark in  games. he helped madrid reach the  copa del rey final by scoring twice in el clsico, which marked the sixth successive match at camp nou in which he had scored, a club record. in the final, he headed the opening goal of an eventual  extra time defeat to atltico, but was shown a red card for violent conduct. in the first knockout round of the champions league, ronaldo faced his former club manchester united for the first time. after scoring the equaliser in a  draw at home, he scored the winning goal in a  win on his first return to old trafford. he did not celebrate scoring against his former club as a mark of respect. after scoring three goals against galatasaray in the quarters, he scored madrids only goal in the  away defeat to borussia dortmund in the semifinals and real were eliminated at the semifinal stage for the third consecutive year despite a  win in the second leg.

at the start of the  season, ronaldo signed a new contract that extended his stay by three years to , with a salary of  million net, making him briefly the highestpaid player in football. he was joined at the club by winger gareth bale, whose world record transfer fee of  million surpassed the fee madrid had paid for ronaldo four years prior. together with striker karim benzema, they formed an attacking trio popularly dubbed bbc, an acronym of bale, benzema and cristiano, and a play on the name of the british public service broadcaster, the british broadcasting corporation . by late november, ronaldo had scored  goals from  matches for both club and country, including hattricks against galatasaray, sevilla, real sociedad, northern ireland, and sweden. he ended  with  goals in  appearances, his highest yearend goal tally. he received the  fifa ballon dor, an amalgamation of the ballon dor and the fifa world player of the year award, for the first time in his career.concurrently with his individual achievements, ronaldo enjoyed his greatest team success in spain to date, as he helped madrid win la dcima, their tenth european cup. his goal in a  home win over dortmund  took his total for the season to  goals, equalling the record messi had set two years before. after hitting a brace in a  defeat of bayern munich at the allianz arena, he scored from the penalty spot in the th minute of the  final win over atltico, becoming the first player to score in two european cup finals for two different winning teams. his overall performance in the final was subdued as a result of patellar tendinitis and related hamstring problems, which had plagued him in the last months of the campaign. ronaldo played the final against medical advice, later commenting in your life you do not win without sacrifices and you must take risks. as the competitions top goalscorer for the third time, with a record  goals, he was named the uefa best player in europe.in the copa del rey, ronaldo helped madrid reach the final by scoring two penalties against atltico at the vicente caldern, the first of which meant he had now scored in every single minute of a minute football match. his continued issues with his knee and thigh caused him to miss the final, where madrid defeated barcelona  to claim the trophy. ronaldo scored  goals in  league games, which earned him the pichichi and the european golden shoe, receiving the latter award jointly with liverpool striker luis surez. among his haul was his th career goal, in  appearances for club and country, which came with a brace against celta vigo on  january; he dedicated his goals to compatriot eusbio, who had died two days before. a lastminute, backheeled volley scored against valencia on  may  was recognised as the best goal of the season by the liga nacional de ftbol profesional, which additionally named ronaldo the best player in la liga.

during the  season, ronaldo set a new personal best of  goals, starting with both goals in madrids  win over sevilla in the uefa super cup. he subsequently achieved his bestever goalscoring start to a league campaign, with  goals in the first eight rounds. his record rd la liga hattrick, scored against celta vigo on  december, made him the fastest player to reach  goals in la liga, reaching the milestone in th matches. after winning the  fifa club world cup, ronaldo received the  ballon dor, joining johan cruyff, michel platini and marco van basten as a threetime recipient. madrid finished in second place in la liga and exited at the semifinal stage in the champions league. in the latter competition, ronaldo extended his run of scoring away to a record  matches with his strike in a  win against schalke . he scored both of his sides goals in the semifinals against juventus, where madrid were eliminated  on aggregate. with  goals, he finished as top scorer for a third consecutive season, alongside messi and neymar. on  april, he scored five goals in a game for the first time in his career, including an eightminute hattrick, in a  rout of granada. his th goal for his club followed three days later in a  win against rayo vallecano. subsequent hattricks against sevilla, espanyol and getafe took his number of hattricks for madrid to , surpassing di stfanos club record of . he finished the season with  goals, winning a second consecutive pichichi and the european golden shoe for a record fourth time.

at the start of his seventh season at madrid, the  campaign, ronaldo became the clubs alltime top scorer, first in the league and then in all competitions. his fivegoal haul in a  away win over espanyol on  september took his tally in la liga to  goals in  games, surpassing the clubs previous record holder, ral. a month later, on  october, he again surpassed ral when he scored the second goal in a  defeat of levante at the bernabu to take his overall total for the club to  goals. ronaldo also became the alltime top scorer in the champions league with a hattrick in the first group match against shakhtar donetsk, having finished the previous season level with messi on  goals. two goals against malm ff in a  away win on  september saw him reach the milestone of  career goals for club and country. he subsequently became the first player to score double figures in the competitions group stage, setting the record at  goals, including another fourgoal haul against malm.

ronaldos four goals in a  home win over celta de vigo on  march  took his total to  goals in la liga, becoming the competitions secondhighest scorer in history behind messi. he scored a hattrick against vfl wolfsburg to send his club into the champions league semifinals. the treble took his tally in the competition to  goals, making him the top scorer for the fourth consecutive season and the fifth overall. suffering apparent fitness issues, ronaldo gave a poorlyreceived performance in the final against atltico, in a repeat of the  final, though his penalty in the subsequent shootout secured madrids th victory. for the sixth successive year, he ended the season having scored over  goals across all competitions. for his efforts during the season, he received the uefa best player in europe award for a second time.ronaldo missed madrids first three matches of the  season, including the  uefa super cup against sevilla, as he continued to rehabilitate the knee injury he suffered against france in the euro  final. on  september, he did not celebrate his late free kick equaliser against sporting cp in the champions league, with ronaldo stating post match that they made me who i am. on  november, his contract was updated for the second time and extended by three years to . on  november, he scored a hattrick in a  away win against atltico, making him the alltime top scorer in the madrid derby with  goals. on  december, ronaldo scored his th club career goal in the  win over club amrica in the semifinals of the  fifa club world cup. he then scored a hattrick in the  win over japanese club kashima antlers in the final. ronaldo finished the tournament as top scorer with four goals and was also named player of the tournament. he won the  ballon dor, his fourth, and the inaugural  the best fifa mens player, a revival of the former fifa world player of the year, largely owing to his success with portugal in winning euro .

in the  uefa champions league quarterfinals against bayern in april, ronaldo scored both goals in a  away win which saw him make history by becoming the first player to reach  goals in uefa club competition. in the second leg of the quarterfinals, ronaldo scored a perfect hattrick and reached his th champions league goal, becoming the first player to do so as madrid again defeated bayern  after extratime. on  may, ronaldo scored another hattrick as madrid defeated atltico  in the champions league semifinal first leg. on  may, ronaldo overtook jimmy greaves as the alltime top scorer in the top five european leagues, scoring twice against celta de vigo. he finished the season with  goals in all competitions as he helped madrid to win their first la liga title since . in the champions league final, ronaldo scored two goals in a  victory over juventus to take him to  goals for the season, making him the competitions top goalscorer for the fifth straight season , as well as the first player to score in three finals in the champions league era; the second goal was the th of his senior career. madrid also became the first team to win backtoback finals in the champions league era.

at the start of the  season, ronaldo scored madrids second goal in the th minute of a  win over barcelona in the first leg of the  supercopa de espaa at camp nou; however, he was sent off two minutes later and missed the second leg. on  october, his performances throughout  saw him awarded the best fifa mens player award for the second consecutive year. on  december, he became the first player to score in all six champions league group stage matches with a curling strike at home to dortmund. a day later, ronaldo won the  ballon dor, receiving his fifthtime award on the eiffel tower in paris. on  december, he scored a free kick winner, as madrid won their second club world cup in a row by beating grmio in the final. on  march , he scored two goals in a  home win over getafe, his first being his th la liga goal in his th appearance, making him the fastest player to reach this landmark and only the second player to do so after messi. on  march, he reached his th career hattrick, scoring four goals in a  win against girona.

on  april, ronaldo scored the first two goals in a  away win against juventus in the quarterfinals of the  uefa champions league, with his second goal being an acrobatic bicycle kick. described as a playstation goal by juventus defender andrea barzagli, with ronaldos foot approximately  ft  in  off the ground, it garnered him a standing ovation from the opposing fans in the stadium as well as a plethora of plaudits from peers, pundits and coaches. on  april, he scored in the second leg at home to juventus, a thminute injury time penalty in a  defeat, meaning madrid advanced  on aggregate. it was his tenth goal against juventus, a champions league record against a single club. in the final on  may, madrid defeated liverpool , winning ronaldo his fifth champions league title, the first player to do so. he finished as the top scorer of the tournament for the sixth consecutive season with  goals. after the final, ronaldo referred to his time with madrid in the past tense, sparking speculation that he could leave the club.

despite months of negotiation to sign a new real madrid contract, on  july , ronaldo signed a fouryear contract with italian club juventus after completing a  million transfer, which included an additional  million in other fees and solidarity contributions to ronaldos youth clubs. the transfer was the highest ever for a player over  years old, and the highest paid by an italian club. upon signing, ronaldo cited his need for a new challenge as his rationale for departing madrid, but later attributed the transfer to the lack of support he felt was shown by club president florentino prez.

on  august, ronaldo made his debut in a  away win against chievo verona. on  september, ronaldo scored his first two goals for juventus in his fourth appearance in a  home win over sassuolo in serie a; his second was the th league goal of his career. on  september, in his first champions league match for juventus, against valencia, he was sent off in the th minute for violent conduct, his first red card in  tournament appearances. ronaldo became the first player in history to win  champions league matches, setting up mario mandukis winner in a  home win over valencia, which sealed juventuss passage to the knockout stages of the competition. in december, he scored his tenth league goal of the season, from the penalty spot, the third in a  away win over fiorentina. after placing second in both the uefa mens player of the year and the best fifa mens player for the first time in three years, behind luka modri, ronaldo performances in  also saw him voted runnerup for the  ballon dor, finishing once again behind his former teammate. ronaldo won his first trophy with the club on  january , the  supercoppa italiana, after he scored the only goal from a header against ac milan.on  february, ronaldo scored in a  win over sassuolo, the ninth consecutive away game in which he had scored in the league, equalling giuseppe signoris single season serie a record of most consecutive away games with at least one goal. on  march, ronaldo scored a hattrick in a  home win against atltico in the second leg of the champions league round of , helping juventus overcome a twogoal deficit to reach the quarterfinals. the following month, he scored his th goal in the competition, opening the scoring in a  away draw in the quarterfinal first leg against ajax on  april. in the second leg in turin on  april, he scored the opening goal, but juventus eventually lost the match  and were eliminated from the competition. on  april, ronaldo played in the scudetto clinching game against fiorentina, as juventus won their eighth successive title after a  home win, thereby becoming the first player to win league titles in england, spain and italy. on  april, he scored his th club goal, the equaliser in a  away draw against derby ditalia rivals inter milan. ending his first serie a campaign with  goals and  assists, ronaldo won the inaugural serie a award for most valuable player.

ronaldo scored his first goal of the  season in a  home league win over napoli on  august . on  september, he came in rd place for the best fifa mens player award. on  october, he reached several milestones in juventuss  champions league group stage win over bayer leverkusen he scored in a th consecutive season, equalling ral and messis record; he broke iker casillas record for most champions league wins of all time, and equalled rals record of scoring against  different opponents. on  november in a  away win against lokomotiv moscow, he equalled paolo maldini as the secondmost capped player in uefa club competitions with  appearances. on  december, ronaldo leapt to a height of  ft  in , higher than the crossbar, to head the winning goal in a  away win against sampdoria. he scored his first serie a hattrick on  january , in a  home win against cagliari. his th career hattrick, he became only the second player after alexis snchez to score hattricks in the premier league, la liga and serie a. on  february, he scored twice from the penalty spot in a  home win over fiorentina, equalling david trezeguets club record of scoring in nine consecutive league games, and broke the record six days later by scoring in his tenth consecutive league game, a  away defeat to hellas verona. on  february, ronaldo scored for a recordequalling th consecutive league game, alongside gabriel batistuta and fabio quagliarella, in what was his ,th senior professional game, a  away win against spal.on  june, he scored a penalty in a  away win over bologna, overtaking rui costa to become the highest scoring portuguese player in serie a history. on  july, he scored his th league goal from a free kick in a  home win over rivals torino, becoming the first juventus player to achieve this milestone since omar svori in ; the goal was also his first from a free kick with the club after  attempts. on  july, ronaldo scored twice in a  home win over lazio; his first goal was his th in serie a. he became the secondfastest player to reach this landmark, after gunnar nordahl, and the first player in history to reach  goals in the premier league, la liga and serie a. with his brace, he also reached  league goals for the season, becoming just the third player  in juventuss history to reach that milestone in a season. moreover, he became the oldest player, at the age of  years and  days, to score over  goals in one of the five top european leagues since ronnie rooke with arsenal in . on  july, ronaldo scored the opening goal in a  home win over sampdoria as juventus were crowned serie a champions for a ninth consecutive time. he finished his second league campaign with  goals, making him the secondhighest goalscorer in the league behind only european golden shoe winner ciro immobile, with  goals. on  august, ronaldo scored a brace in a  home win against lyon in the second leg of the champions league round of , which saw him finish the season with  goals in all competitions; the tally allowed him to break borels club record of  goals in a single season. despite the win, the tie finished  on aggregate and juventus were eliminated from the competition on the away goals rule.

on  september , ronaldo scored in juventuss opening league match of the season, a  home win over sampdoria. on  november, having taken nearly three weeks to recover from covid, he returned to action against spezia; he came off the bench in the second half and scored within the first three minutes, before scoring a second goal from the penalty spot in an eventual  away win. on  december, he scored a goal against dynamo kyiv in a champions league group stage match, his th senior career goal. ronaldo played his th match in all competitions for juventus on  december, scoring two penalties in a  away win over genoa in the league to bring his goal tally to . on  january , juventus won the  supercoppa italiana after a  win against napoli, with ronaldo scoring the opening goal. on  march, he scored a goal in a  win over spezia in his th league match, to become the first player to score at least  goals in  consecutive seasons in the top five leagues of europe. on  march, he scored his th career hattrick in a  away win over cagliari. on  may, ronaldo scored a goal in a  away win over sassuolo to reach his th goal for juventus in all competitions on his st appearance, becoming the fastest juventus player to achieve the feat. with juventuss victory in the  coppa italia final on  may, ronaldo became the first player in history to win every major domestic trophy in england, spain and italy. ronaldo ended the season with  league goals, winning the capocannoniere award for highest goalscorer and becoming the first footballer to finish as top scorer in the english, spanish and italian leagues.on  august, ronaldo started the first game of the new season on the bench, coming on as a substitute for lvaro morata in a  draw against udinese, scoring a goal that was ruled out by var. though manager massimiliano allegri confirmed it was his decision due to ronaldos fitness, it came amid reports ronaldo would depart the club before the closure of the transfer window, and ronaldo would tell allegri he had no intention of remaining a juventus player. on  august, ronaldo and his agent jorge mendes reached a verbal agreement with manchester city over personal terms, but the club pulled out of the deal the following day due to the overall cost of the transfer. on the same day, it was confirmed that citys rivals manchester united, ronaldos former club, were in advanced talks to sign him, while former manager alex ferguson and several exteammates had been in contact to persuade him to resign for united.

on  august , manchester united announced they had reached an agreement with juventus to resign ronaldo, subject to agreement of personal terms, visa and medical. the transfer was for an initial . million, with a twoyear contract plus an optional year, and was confirmed on  august. ronaldo was given the number  shirt after edinson cavani agreed to switch to . the first  hours of ronaldos shirt sales was reported to have broken the alltime record following a transfer, overtaking messi after his move to paris saintgermain.

on  september, ronaldo made his second debut at old trafford, scoring the opening two goals in a  league victory against newcastle united. on  september, he scored a lastminute winner in uniteds  victory at home to villarreal in the champions league, and overtook iker casillas as the player with the most appearances in the competition. in the next champions league fixture on  october, ronaldo again scored a last minute winner, helping united overturn a twogoal deficit in a  home victory against atalanta, and scored both goals, including a last minute equaliser, in the reverse fixture against atalanta on  november. on  november, ronaldo became the first player to score in five consecutive matches of a champions league campaign for an english club, after opening uniteds  victory away against villarreal, with his six goals being crucial to uniteds qualifying for the round of  as group winners. on  december, ronaldo netted two goals in a  home league win against arsenal, which saw him surpass  career goals.the following month, after enduring a fractured relationship with his teammates and interim manager ralf rangnick, his performances and his teams declined during the season, with ronaldo equalling his worst goalscoring run since  during his time with real madrid, being two months without scoring a goal, before scoring his first goal in the new year, opening uniteds  win home against brighton  hove albion on  february . following a hamstring injury, which saw him miss the manchester derby against manchester city, ronaldo made his return from injury on  march, scoring a hattrick in a  victory against tottenham hotspur, which saw him pass josef bicans record for goals scored in professional football with  career goals, although the football association of the czech republic claimed that bican had scored  career goals. on  april, ronaldo scored his th club hattrick in a  win over norwich city. on  april, he scored his th premier league goal in a  defeat to arsenal. after scoring in the following matches against chelsea and brentford, he was named the premier league player of the month for april.he finished the season with  goals in all competitions,  of those goals being in the premier league, making him the thirdhighest goalscorer in the league behind golden boot winners mohamed salah and son heungmin, being named in the premier league team of the year and the winner of uniteds sir matt busby player of the year award, given to the clubs best player from the previous season; however, with united finishing in a disappointing sixth place and qualifying for the uefa europa league, ronaldo went trophyless for the first time since .

after growing dissatisfaction with the direction of united on and off the field, ronaldo missed the clubs preseason tour of thailand and australia due to family reasons, amid reports of his desire to leave to join a club competing in the champions league, despite incoming manager erik ten hag insisting that he was not for sale and was part of the clubs plans. his agent jorge mendes began negotiating with various clubs for a transfer on loan or on a free transfer, including bayern munich, paris saintgermain and chelsea, with the latter clubs new owner todd boehly being keen on a possible transfer. however, due to his age, overall cost of a transfer and high wages demands, multiple european clubs rejected the opportunity to sign him, including chelsea after their manager thomas tuchel did not approve his signing.

having failed to secure a transfer, ronaldo lost his place in the starting lineup to marcus rashford and anthony martial, mostly featuring in europa league matches. he scored his first goal in the competition aged , converting a penalty to make it  against sheriff tiraspol on  september. on  october, ronaldo was an unused substitute in uniteds  loss to manchester city, with ten hag saying that he refused to bring him on out of respect for his big career. on  october, ronaldo came on as a substitute and scored his th career club goal in a  win against everton. ten days later, ronaldo refused to be brought on as a substitute during a home game against tottenham and left the ground before the fulltime whistle; ten hag punished him by dropping him from the squad for an upcoming fixture with chelsea, and made him train separately from the first team. following discussions with the manager, ronaldo returned to training and started in uniteds home win over sheriff on  october, scoring the third goal and ensuring uniteds qualification to the europa league knockout stage. ten hag named ronaldo as captain for a  defeat to aston villa on  november, saying that ronaldo was an important part of the squad, we are happy with him and now he has to take even more of the leader role. ronaldo then missed uniteds following matches before the world cup break, with ten hag saying that ronaldo was ill.on  november, an interview with piers morgan was published, where ronaldo said that he felt betrayed by ten hag and senior executives who wanted ronaldo to leave the club, and accused the club of doubting him regarding the illness of his daughter that led him to miss preseason, adding that he did not respect ten hag because he doesnt show respect for me, leading him to be disappointed with the communication of the club. ronaldo claimed that ten hag deliberately provoked him by first leaving him on the bench against city, and then wanting to bring him on in the final moments against tottenham, but added that he regretted his decision to leave early. he also questioned the appointment of rangnick the previous season as he was a sporting director and not even a coach. on the club itself, ronaldo stated there was no evolution since the departure of former manager alex ferguson in , despite expecting changes in technology, infrastructure. ronaldo claimed that the glazer family did not care about the club as he never spoke with them, and described united as a marketing club. following the interview, which aired in twoparts on  and  november, united began seeking legal action over whether ronaldo had breached his contract, and were looking to terminate his contract. on  november, ronaldos contract was terminated by mutual agreement with immediate effect.

on  december , saudi club al nassr reached an agreement for ronaldo to join the club effective  january , signing a contract until . as reported by fabrizio romano of the guardian, ronaldo received the highest football salary in history, worth  million per year; this included an annual guaranteed football salary of  million, with commercial and sponsorship deals included bringing his total annual salary to  million. he was also reportedly paid a signingon bonus in the region of  million. according to romano, ronaldo rejected a move to major league soccer club sporting kansas city to join al nassr.

ronaldo was due to appear in a match against altai on  january , but had to serve a twomatch ban incurred while he was still at manchester united for knocking a phone out of a yearold everton fans hand after a  loss at goodison park in april . on  january, ronaldo played for the first time since transferring to saudi arabia, in an exhibition game featuring a combined team of riyadhs al nassr and al hilal players against paris saintgermain. ronaldo scored twice in a  loss. he made his debut for al nassr on  january, as club captain, playing the full  minutes of a  win over alettifaq, and scored his first goal in a  draw against alfateh by converting a lastminute penalty. on  february, ronaldo scored all four goals in a  win over al wehda, his first goal of the match being his th career league goal. on  february, he scored his second hattrick for the club, helping his side to a  away league victory against damac. ronaldo was awarded the player of the month award for february after scoring eight goals and assisting twice. ronaldo spent another season without winning a league title, as al nassr finished second in the league in the  season.

ronaldos signing for alnassr resulted in increased popularity both domestically and internationally of the saudi pro league, with various european players such as karim benzema, sadio man, ngolo kant, rben neves, riyad mahrez, roberto firmino and neymar moving to the saudi pro league during the summer transfer window, crediting ronaldo as one of the main factors for moving to the league.

he scored his first goal of the  season in a  win over union monastirienne in the arab club champions cup on  july. in the next arab club champions cup fixture on  august, ronaldo scored a late equaliser against zamalek, to help his side secure a  draw and qualify for the quarterfinals in second place of their group. in the semifinals on  august, ronaldo scored the only goal of a win over alshorta, converting a penalty to help al nassr reach their first ever arab club champions cup final. in the final on  august, ronaldo scored both goals for a tenman al nassr as they defeated rivals alhilal  after extra time to win the competition for the first time in their history. ronaldo was awarded the competitions top scorer award having scored six goals in the competition.on  august, ronaldo made his first league appearance of the season in a  defeat to altaawoun, and scored his first hattrick of the season in a  away win against alfateh a week later. on  august, ronaldo scored twice and assisted once in a  win against rivals alshabab. ronaldo was awarded the spl player of the month award for august after scoring five goals and assisting twice. on  september, he scored a goal in alnassrs  away win against alhazem, his th senior career goal. on  september, ronaldo made his afc champions league debut, starting in a  win over persepolis, becoming the first player in football history to record  career games unbeaten . ronaldo received the spl player of the month award for a second consecutive month after recording five goals and three assists in september. on  october, he scored his first afc champions league goal in the home fixture against istiklol, the equaliser in an eventual  win.

ronaldo began his international career with portugal under in . during his international youth career, ronaldo would represent the under, under, under, under and under national sides, amassing  youth caps and scoring  goals overall.aged , ronaldo made his first senior appearance for portugal in a  win over kazakhstan on  august , coming on as a halftime substitute for lus figo. he was subsequently called up for uefa euro , held in his home country, and scored his first international goal in a  group stage loss to eventual champions greece, his eighth appearance for portugal. after converting his penalty in a shootout against england in the quarterfinals, he helped portugal reach the final by scoring the opening goal in a  win over the netherlands. he was featured in the team of the tournament, having provided two assists in addition to his two goals.ronaldo was portugals secondhighest scorer in their qualification group for the  fifa world cup with seven goals. during the tournament, he scored his first world cup goal against iran with a penalty kick in portugals second match of the group stage. at the age of  years and  days, ronaldo became the youngest ever goalscorer for portugal at a world cup finals. in portugals infamously dirty round of  match against the netherlands, ronaldo was forced off injured in the first half after a tackle from dutch defender khalid boulahrouz. following portugals  win, ronaldo accused boulahrouz of intentionally trying to injure him, although he recovered in time to play in the next game. in portugals quarterfinal against england, ronaldos manchester united teammate wayne rooney was sent off for stamping on portugal defender ricardo carvalho. although the referee later clarified that the red card was only due to rooneys infraction, the english media speculated that ronaldo had influenced his decision by aggressively complaining, after which he was seen in replays winking at portugals bench following rooneys dismissal. ronaldo went on to score the vital winning penalty during the shootout which sent portugal into the semifinals. ronaldo was subsequently booed during their  semifinal defeat to france. fifas technical study group overlooked him for the tournaments best young player award and handed it to germanys lukas podolski, citing his behaviour as a factor in the decision. following the  world cup, ronaldo would go on to represent portugal in four qualifying games for euro , scoring two goals in the process.

one day after turning , ronaldo captained portugal for the first time in a friendly game against brazil on  february , as requested by portuguese football federation  president carlos silva, who had died two days earlier. ahead of euro , he was given the number  shirt for the first time. while he scored eight goals in qualifications, the secondhighest tally, he scored just one goal in the tournament, netting the second goal of their  win in the group stage match against the czech republic. in the same game, he also setup portugals third goal in injury time, which was scored by quaresma, and was named man of the match for his performance. portugal were eliminated in the quarterfinals with a  loss against eventual finalists germany.after portugals unsuccessful performance at euro , luiz felipe scolari was replaced as coach by carlos queiroz, formerly the assistant manager at united. queiroz made ronaldo the squads permanent captain in july . ronaldo failed to score a single goal in the qualification for the  world cup, as portugal narrowly avoided a premature elimination from the tournament with a playoff victory over bosnia and herzegovina. in the group stage of the world cup, he was named man of the match in all three matches, against ivory coast, north korea and brazil. his only goal of the tournament came in their  rout of north korea, which marked his first international goal in  months. portugals world cup ended with a  loss against eventual champions spain in the round of .ronaldo scored seven goals in qualifications for euro , including two strikes against bosnia and herzegovina in the playoffs, to send portugal into the tournament, where they were drawn in a group of death. in the last group stage game against the netherlands, ronaldo scored twice to secure a  win. he scored a header in the quarterfinal against the czech republic to give his team a  win. in both games against the netherlands and the czech republic he was named man of the match. after the semifinals against spain ended scoreless, portugal were eliminated in the penalty shootout. ronaldo did not take a penalty as he had been slated to take the unused fifth slot. ronaldos own teammate, nani, said that ronaldo demanded to take the last penalty. as the joint top scorer with three goals, alongside five other players, he was again included in the team of the tournament.

during the qualification for the  world cup, ronaldo scored a total of eight goals. a qualifying match on  october , a  draw against northern ireland, earned him his th cap. his first international hattrick also came against northern ireland, when he scored three times in a minute spell of a  qualifying win on  september . after portugal failed to qualify during the regular campaign, ronaldo scored all four of the teams goals in the playoffs against sweden, billed as a battle between ronaldo and zlatan ibrahimovi, which ensured their place at the tournament. his hattrick in the second leg took his international tally to  goals, equalling pauletas record. ronaldo subsequently scored twice in a  friendly win over cameroon on  march  to become his countrys alltime top scorer.ronaldo took part in the tournament despite suffering from patellar tendinitis and a related thigh injury, potentially risking his career. ronaldo later commented if we had two or three cristiano ronaldos in the team i would feel more comfortable. but we dont. despite ongoing doubts over his fitness, being forced to abort practice twice, ronaldo played the full  minutes of the opening match against germany, although he was unable to prevent a  defeat. after assisting an injurytime  equaliser against the united states, he scored a late matchwinning goal in a  win over ghana. his th international goal made him the first portuguese to play and score in three world cups. portugal were eliminated from the tournament at the close of the group stage on goal difference.

ronaldo scored five goals, including a hattrick against armenia, in the qualification for euro . with the only goal in another win over armenia on  november , he reached  goals in the uefa european championship, including qualifying matches, to become the competitions alltime leading goalscorer. at the start of the tournament, ronaldo failed to convert his chances in portugals draws against iceland and austria, despite taking  shots on goal. in the latter match, he overtook figo as portugals most capped player with his th international appearance, which ended scoreless after he missed a penalty in the second half. with two goals in the last match of the group stage, a  draw against hungary, ronaldo became the first player to score in four european championships, having made a record  appearances in the tournament. although placed third in their group behind hungary and iceland, his team qualified for the knockout round as a result of the competitions newly expanded format, despite not winning any of their games.in portugals first knockout match, ronaldos only attempt on goal was parried by croatias goalkeeper danijel subai into the path of ricardo quaresma, whose finish then secured a  win late in extra time. after his team progressed past poland on penalties, with ronaldo scoring portugals opening penalty, he became the first player to participate in three european championship semifinals; he scored the opener in a  win against wales, equalling michel platini as the competitions alltime top scorer with nine goals. in the final against hosts france, ronaldo was forced off after just  minutes following a challenge from dimitri payet, despite multiple treatments and attempts to play on, he was stretchered off the pitch and replaced by quaresma. during extra time, substitute eder scored in the th minute to earn portugal a  victory. as team captain, ronaldo lifted the trophy in celebration of his countrys first triumph in a major tournament. he was awarded the silver boot as the joint secondhighest goalscorer, with three goals and three assists, and was named to the team of the tournament for the third time in his career.

following the euro  success, ronaldo played his first professional match on his home island of madeira on  march  at age , opening a  friendly defeat to sweden at the estdio dos barreiros. with the goal, he tied with miroslav klose on  goals as the thirdhighest scoring european in international football.in portugals opening match of the  fifa confederations cup against mexico on  june, ronaldo set up quaresmas opening goal in a  draw. three days later, he scored in a  win over hosts russia. on  june, he scored from a penalty in a  win over new zealand, which saw portugal top their group and advance to the semifinals of the competition; with his th international goal, ronaldo also equalled sndor kocsis as the secondhighest european international goalscorer of all time, behind only ferenc pusks. he was named man of the match in all three of portugals group stage matches. ronaldo left the competition early; after chile defeated portugal  on penalties in the semifinals, he was allowed to return home to be with his newborn children, and missed portugals thirdplace playoff match in which portugal defeated mexico  after extra time.

on  august , ronaldo scored a hattrick in a  win in a  world cup qualifying match over the faroe islands, which saw him overtake pel and equal hussein saeed as the jointfifthhighest goalscorer in international football with  goals. these goals brought his tally in the world cup qualifiers to , equalling predrag mijatovis record for most goals in a single uefa qualifying campaign, and also saw him break the record for the most goals scored in a european qualifying group, overtaking the previous record of  goals set by david healy and robert lewandowski. ronaldos hattrick took his world cup qualifying goals total to , making him the highest scorer in uefa qualifiers, ahead of andriy shevchenko, and the highest goalscorer in world cup qualifying and finals matches combined with  goals, ahead of miroslav klose. ronaldo later added to this tally by scoring a goal against andorra in a  win.on  june , ronaldo became the oldest player to score a hattrick in a fifa world cup match, helping portugal secure a  draw against spain  in their opening match. in doing so, he became the first portuguese player to score a goal in four world cups and one of four players of any nationality to do so. on  june, ronaldo scored the only goal in a  win against morocco, breaking pusks record as the highest european goalscorer of all time, with  international goals. in the final group match against iran on  june, ronaldo missed a penalty in an eventual  draw which saw portugal progress to the second round as group runnersup behind spain. on  june, portugal were eliminated following a  defeat to uruguay in the last . for his performances in the tournament, ronaldo was named in the world cup dream team.

after the world cup, ronaldo missed six international matches, including the entire league phase of the  uefa nations league, but played for hosts portugal in the inaugural nations league finals in june . in the semifinals on  june, he scored a hattrick against switzerland to reach the final. upon scoring the opening goal, he became the first player to score in  consecutive international competitions, breaking the record he previously shared with ghanas asamoah gyan. in the final of the tournament four days later, portugal defeated the netherlands .on  september , ronaldo scored four goals in a  away win over lithuania in a euro  qualifying match; in the process, he overtook robbie keane  as the player with most goals in the uefa european championship qualifying, setting a new record with  goals. he also set a new record for scoring against the most national teams, , while also completing his eighth international hattrick. on  october, he scored his th senior career goal for club and country from the penalty spot, in his th senior career appearance, a  away loss to ukraine in a euro  qualifier. on  november, ronaldo scored his th international goal in a  win over luxembourg, leading portugal to qualify for euro . on  september , ronaldo scored his th and st international goals in a  away win over sweden in a  uefa nations league match, becoming only the second male player ever to achieve this milestone  and the first in europe. on  october, the fpf announced that ronaldo tested positive for covid while being asymptomatic. by  october, ronaldo had recovered.

on  june , ronaldo scored twice in portugals first game of euro , a  win against hungary in budapest. this took him to a total of  european championship goals, two clear of michel platini, as the alltime top goalscorer in the competitions history. he also became the first player to score at five euros, and in eleven consecutive tournaments. the brace made ronaldo the oldest player to score two goals in a match in the competition, and the oldest player to score for portugal at a major tournament. on  june, he scored two penalties in portugals  draw with france in their final group stage match, equalling daeis record of  international goals. on  june, portugal were eliminated following a  loss against belgium in the round of . ronaldo finished the tournament with five goals  and one assist, earning him the golden boot.on  september, ronaldo scored two headed goals, with his second coming seconds before the fulltime whistle, in a  home win against the republic of ireland in a world cup qualifier at the estdio algarve, which saw him pass ali daei to become the sole record holder by breaking the mens international scoring record with his th and th international goals. on  october, he scored the opening goal in a  friendly win over qatar at the estdio algarve; with his st international appearance, he also overtook sergio ramoss record for the most international caps received by a european player. in the following match against luxembourg on  october, also played at the estdio algarve, ronaldo scored a hattrick in a  win for portugal, and became the first player to score  hattricks in mens international football.

ronaldo was named in portugals squad for the  fifa world cup in qatar, making it his fifth world cup. on  november, in portugals opening match against ghana, ronaldo scored a penalty kick and became the first male player to score in five different world cups. in the last group game against south korea, ronaldo received criticism from his own coach for his reaction at being substituted. he was dropped from the starting lineup for portugals last  match against switzerland, marking the first time since euro  that he had not started a game for portugal in a major international tournament, and the first time portugal had started a knockout game without ronaldo in the starting lineup at an international tournament since euro . he came off the bench late on as portugal won , their highest tally in a world cup knockout game since the  world cup, with ronaldos replacement gonalo ramos scoring a hattrick. portugal employed the same strategy in the quarterfinals against morocco, with ronaldo once again coming off the bench; in the process, he equalled bader almutawas international appearance record, becoming the jointmost capped male footballer of all time, with  caps. portugal lost , with morocco becoming the first caf nation ever to reach the world cup semifinals.following the world cup, despite having his future with the national team in doubt, after rumours of a possible omission by new manager roberto martnez, ronaldo was named in portugals squad for the uefa euro  qualifiers against liechtenstein and luxembourg. on  march, ronaldo scored a brace in a  win over liechtenstein; with his th international appearance, he overtook almutawas record and became the most capped male footballer of all time. on  june, ronaldo made his th appearance for his national team, scoring the only goal of an away win over iceland, in the euro qualifiers, as he became the first player in the history of mens international football to make  appearances for his country. on  october, ronaldo scored a brace in a  win over slovakia, leading portugal to qualify for euro , marking the nations fastest qualification to a major tournament in their history.

a versatile attacker, ronaldo is capable of playing on either wing as well as through the centre of the pitch, and, while ostensibly rightfooted, is very strong with both feet. tactically, ronaldo has undergone several evolutions throughout his career. while at sporting and during his first season at manchester united, he was typically deployed as a traditional winger on the right side of midfield, where he regularly looked to deliver crosses into the penalty area. in this position, he was able to use his pace and acceleration, agility and technical skills to take on opponents in oneonone situations. ronaldo became noted for his dribbling and flair, often displaying an array of tricks and feints, such as the step overs and socalled chops that became his trademark; he has also been known to use the flipflap.

his strength and jumping ability, combined with his elevation, heading accuracy and height of . m , give him an edge in winning aerial duels. these attributes allow him to function as a targetman and make him an aerial goal threat in the penalty area; consequently, many of his goals have been headers. allied with his increased stamina and workrate, his goalscoring ability improved drastically on the left wing where he was given the positional freedom to move into the centre to finish attacks. he has also increasingly played a creative role for his team, often dropping deep to pick up the ball, participate in the buildup of plays and create chances for his teammates, courtesy of his vision and passing ability.in his final seasons at united, ronaldo played an even more attacking and central role, functioning both as a striker and as a supporting forward, or even as an attacking midfielder on occasion. he developed into a prolific goalscorer, capable of finishing well both inside the penalty area and from distance with an accurate and powerful shot, courtesy of his striking ability. an accurate penalty kick taker, he also became a set piece specialist, renowned for his powerful, bending free kicks. when taking free kicks, ronaldo is known for using the knuckleball technique, which was developed by juninho pernambucano. he also adopts a trademark stance before striking the ball, which involves him standing with his legs far apart. regarding ronaldos unique style of taking free kicks, former united assistant manager mike phelan commented people used to put the ball down, walk away, run up and hit it. he brought in a more dynamic showmanship. he places the ball down, the concentration level is high, he takes his certain amount of steps back so that his standing foot is in the perfect place to hit the ball in the sweet spot. he is the ultimate showman. he has that slight arrogance. when he pulls those shorts up and shows his thighs, he is saying all eyes on me and this is going in. he understands the marketing side of it. the way he struts up and places it; the world is watching him.

at real madrid, ronaldo continued to play a more offensive role, while his creative and defensive duties became more limited, although not entirely diminished. initially deployed as a centre forward by managers manuel pellegrini and jos mourinho, he was later moved back onto the left wing, though in a free tactical role; this position allowed him to drift into the centre at will to get onto the end of crosses and score, or draw out defenders with his movement off the ball and leave space for teammates to exploit. madrids counterattacking style of play also allowed him to become a more efficient and consistent player, as evidenced by his recordbreaking goalscoring feats. while he mainly drew praise in the media for his prolific goalscoring, ronaldo also demonstrated his ability as an effective creator in this role. this unique role has been described by pundits as that of a false, attacking, or goalscoring winger, as ronaldo effectively almost functioned as a striker at times with his central runs into the penalty area, despite actually playing on the left flank. from  onwards, under manager carlo ancelotti, he effectively adapted his style to the physical effects of ageing with increasingly reduced offtheball movement and general involvement, completing fewer dribbles and passes per game, and instead focusing on shortdistance creating and goalscoring. since , ronaldo adapted his style of play yet again to become more of a freeroaming centre forward under manager zinedine zidane, a role in which he continued to excel and maintain a prolific goalscoring record; in this position, he earned praise in the media for his intelligent movement both on and off the ball, positional sense, linkup play and finishing, as well as his ability to lose or anticipate his markers, find space in the box and score from few touches or opportunities.in his first season at juventus, ronaldo continued to play in a variety of different attacking roles under manager massimiliano allegri, depending on whom he was partnered with. while he had occupied an increasingly offensive role in his final years at real madrid, at times he functioned in a free role at juventus, either as a lone striker or in his trademark role on the left wing, in a  or  formation, in which he often switched positions with mario manduki. in this role, he was also given licence to drop deep or even out wide onto the right flank to receive the ball, and be more involved in the buildup of plays; as such, aside from scoring goals himself, he began to take on opponents and create chances for other players with greater frequency than he had in his final seasons with real madrid. off the ball, he was also capable of creating space for teammates with his movement and attacking runs into the box, or finishing off chances with his head or feet by getting onto the end of his teammates crosses. on occasion he also played in an attacking partnership alongside manduki in a , , or  formation. he continued to play a similar role in his second season with the club under manager maurizio sarri.

ronaldo is widely regarded as one of the two best players of his generation, alongside lionel messi. winning his first ballon dor in  by a recordhigh vote count at age , over the next decade ronaldo has often featured in debates concerning who is the greatest player in history. acclaimed for his prolific and consistent goalscoring, he is considered a decisive player who is also a game changer, especially in important and highpressured situations.

ronaldo is noted for his work ethic, elite body conditioning and dedication to improvement on the training pitch, as well being regarded as a natural leader. on his longevity and extraordinary commitment to physical preparation, adam bate of sky sports said dedication is a huge part of staying at the top and ronaldos focus is perhaps unparalleled within the game. while stating they were stylistically different players who shared an equal desire to score goals, former brazil international ronaldo praised cristianos approach to training, arguing that there are so few players who take care of their body like he does. i trained because i had to, he does it because he loves it. his drive and determination to succeed are fuelled by a desire to be talked about alongside other greats such as pel and diego maradona once retiring. he is credited, along with his compatriot, coach jos mourinho, with inspiring changing fortunes of portuguese football in s and s. at times, he has been criticised for simulating when tackled. he was also occasionally criticised early in his career by manager alex ferguson, teammates and the media for being a selfish or overly flamboyant player. jonathan wilson of the guardian opined that ronaldo had made juventus, who he joined aged  in , weaker, due to his relative immobility in his mids, even if his personal goalscoring output remained high.during his career, ronaldo has also been described as having an arrogant image on the pitch, with ronaldo stating that he had become a victim because of how he was portrayed in the media. he is often seen moaning, gesticulating and scowling while trying to inspire his team to victory, with ronaldo insisting that his competitive nature should not be mistaken for arrogance. his managers, teammates and various journalists have said that this reputation has caused an unfair image of him.

ronaldo has adopted several goal celebrations throughout his career, including one particular celebration which gained widespread coverage in the media, when he squatted and stared directly into a camera on the sidelines of the pitch with his hand on his chin. after scoring a goal, he usually celebrates with a storming jump and turn, before landing in spreadeagled fashion into his signature power stance, while usually simultaneously exclaiming s . this trademark celebration has been dubbed the sii in the media.

both ronaldo and lionel messi have scored in multiple uefa champions league finals and have regularly broken the goal barrier in a single season. sports journalists and pundits regularly weigh the individual merits of both players in an attempt to argue who they believe is the best player in modern football or in the history of the game. it has been compared to several sports rivalries, among them the muhammad alijoe frazier rivalry in boxing, the borgmcenroe rivalry in tennis and the sennaprost rivalry from formula one motor racing. some commentators choose to analyse the differing physiques and playing styles of the two. part of the debate revolves around the contrasting personalities of the two players, as ronaldo is sometimes depicted as an arrogant and theatrical showoff, while messi is portrayed as a shy, humble character.

in a  interview, ronaldo commented on the rivalry, saying i think we push each other sometimes in the competition, this is why the competition is so high. alex ferguson, ronaldos manager during his time at manchester united, opined i dont think the rivalry against each other bothers them. i think they have their own personal pride in terms of wanting to be the best. messi himself denied any rivalry, saying that it was only the media, the press, who wants us to be at loggerheads but ive never fought with cristiano. responding to the claims that he and messi do not get on well on a personal level, ronaldo commented we dont have a relationship outside the world of football, just as we dont with a lot of other players. ronaldo added that in years to come he hopes they can laugh about it together, stating we have to look on this rivalry with a positive spirit, because its a good thing. representing archrivals barcelona and real madrid, the two players faced each other at least twice every season in the worlds biggest club game, el clsico, which is among the worlds most viewed annual sporting events.in a debate at oxford union in october , when asked whether fifa president sepp blatter preferred messi or ronaldo, blatter paid tribute to the work ethic of the argentine before taking a swipe at ronaldo, claiming one of them has more expenses for the hairdresser than the other. real madrid demanded and promptly received a full apology. in response to blatters commander on the pitch comment, ronaldo issued his own riposte with a mocksalute celebration after scoring a penalty against sevilla. in august , ronaldo and messi were interviewed while sat next to each other prior to the announcement of the uefa mens player of the year, with ronaldo stating i pushed him and he pushed me as well. so its good to be part of the history of football.in september , ronaldo declared that his rivalry with messi was over and gone, after  official fixtures and  years of sharing the stage.

as his reputation grew from his time at manchester united, ronaldo has signed many sponsorship deals for consumer products, including sportswear, football boots; since november , ronaldo has worn the nike mercurial vapor personalised cr edition, soft drinks, clothing, automotive lubricants, financial services, electronics, and video games. ronaldo was featured as the cover star of ea sports fifa video game fifa  and was heavily involved in the games promotion. his sii goal celebration features in the fifa series, accompanied with his own voiceover. he was also the face of pro evolution soccer, appearing on the covers of the ,  and  editions of the game.with earnings of  million  from  to , ronaldo was ranked second in forbes list of the decades highestpaid athletes, behind boxer floyd mayweather jr.. forbes twice ranked ronaldo first on its list of the worlds highestpaid football players; his combined income from salaries, bonuses and endorsements was  million in  and  million in . the latter earnings saw him listed behind only mayweather on the magazines list of the worlds highestpaid athletes. in , he became the first footballer to top the forbes list of highestearning athletes, with a total income of  million from his salary and endorsements in . he topped the list for the second straight year with earnings of  million in . he is the first footballer and only the third sportsman to earn  billion in their career. ronaldo is one of the worlds most marketable sportsmen sportspro rated him the fifth most marketable athlete in  and eighth most marketable athlete in , with brazilian footballer neymar topping both lists. sports market research company repucom named ronaldo the most marketable and most recognised football player in the world in may . he was additionally named in the  time , times annual list of the most influential people in the world. espn named ronaldo the worlds most famous athlete in , ,  and .

ronaldo has established a strong online presence. the most popular sportsperson on social media, he counted over  million total followers across facebook, twitter and instagram by february , making him the first person to pass half a billion followers. the mostfollowed person on facebook , the mostfollowed on instagram  and the mostfollowed sportsperson on twitter , his sponsors earned  million in media value across his accounts between june  to june . ronaldo has released two mobile apps. in december , he launched an iphone game called heads up with cristiano, created by developer rocklive, and in december , he launched viva ronaldo, a dedicated social networking website and app. computer security company mcafee produced a  report ranking footballers by the probability of an internet search for their name leading to an unsafe website, with ronaldos name first on the list.ronaldo has been the subject of several works. his autobiography, titled moments, was published in december . his sponsor castrol produced the television film ronaldo tested to the limit, in which he was physically and mentally tested in several areas; his physical performance was consequently subject to scrutiny by world media upon the films release in september . cristiano ronaldo the world at his feet, a documentary narrated by actor benedict cumberbatch, was released via vimeo in june . a documentary film directed by anthony wonke about his life and career, titled ronaldo, was released on  november .

demand for a replica ronaldo shirt has been high throughout his career. in , ronaldos number  manchester united shirt was the bestselling premier league sports product. in , ronaldos number  real madrid shirt was the second bestselling worldwide, after messis number  barcelona shirt. in , within  hours of his number  juventus shirt being released, over , had been sold, with . million generated in one day.ronaldo opened a fashion boutique under the name cr  on the island of madeira in  and opened a second in lisbon in . in partnership with scandinavian manufacturer jbs textile group and the new york fashion designer richard chai, ronaldo codesigned a range of underwear and sock line, released in november . he expanded his cr fashion brand by launching a line of premium shirts and shoes in july . in september , ronaldo released his own fragrance, legacy, in a partnership with eden parfums.

in , c.d. nacional renamed its youth campus cristiano ronaldo campus futebol . in december , ronaldo opened a museum, museu cr, in his hometown of funchal, madeira, to house trophies and memorabilia; the museum is an official sponsor of the local football team unio da madeira. at a ceremony held at the belm palace in january , president of portugal anbal cavaco silva raised ronaldo to the rank of grand officer of the order of prince henry to distinguish an athlete of world renown who has been a symbol of portugal globally, contributing to the international projection of the country and setting an example of tenacity for future generations. a bronze statue of ronaldo, designed by artist ricardo madeira veloso, was unveiled in funchal on  december .

in june , during the buildup to the world cup, ronaldo became the fourth footballer  to be represented as a waxwork at madame tussauds london. another waxwork of him was presented at the madrid wax museum in december . in june , astronomers led by david sobral from lisbon and leiden discovered a galaxy which they named cosmos redshift   in tribute to ronaldo.on  july , following portugals triumph at euro , madeira airport in funchal was renamed as cristiano ronaldo international airport. the unveiling of the rebranded terminal took place on  march , which included a bust of his head being presented. the bust and the name change were controversial, with the lack of the busts likeness to ronaldo being ridiculed by comedians, including saturday night live, while the name change was subject to much debate locally by some politicians and citizens, who even started a petition against the move, an action criticised by president of madeira miguel albuquerque. a year later, sports website bleacher report commissioned sculptor emanuel santos to create another bust; however, this bust was never used and a new one was made by a spanish sculptor, shown to the public on  june .on  september , the sporting cps football academy in alcochete, until then called academia sporting, was renamed academia cristiano ronaldo.

ronaldo has made contributions to various charitable causes throughout his career. television footage of the  indian ocean earthquake and tsunami showed an eightyearold boy survivor named martunis wearing a portuguese football shirt who was stranded for  days after his family was killed. following this, ronaldo visited aceh, indonesia, to raise funds for rehabilitation and reconstruction. after accepting undisclosed damages from a libel case against the sun newspaper in , ronaldo donated the damages to a charity in madeira. in , ronaldo donated , to the hospital that saved his mothers life in madeira following her battle with cancer, so that they could build a cancer centre on the island. in support of the victims of the  madeira flood, ronaldo pledged to play in a charity match in madeira between primeira liga club porto and players from madeiranbased clubs martimo and nacional.in , ronaldo and his agent paid for specialist treatment for a nineyearold canarian boy with apparently terminal cancer. in december , ronaldo joined fifas  for health programme to raise awareness amongst kids of how to steer clear of conditions including drug addiction, hiv, malaria, and obesity. in january , ronaldo became save the childrens new global artist ambassador, in which he hopes to help fight child hunger and obesity. in march , ronaldo agreed to be the ambassador for the mangrove care forum in indonesia, an organisation aiming to raise awareness of mangrove conservation.ronaldo was named the worlds most charitable sportsperson in  after donating  million to the relief effort after the earthquake in nepal which killed over , people. in june , ronaldo donated the entirety of his , champions league bonus after real madrid won the competition. in august, ronaldo launched crselfie, a selfie app for charity to help save the children that lets participants take a selfie with him in one of several different outfits and poses.

ronaldo has five children. he first became a father to a son, who was born on  june  in the united states. he has full custody of the child and has not publicly revealed the identity of the mother per an agreement with her. in january , ronaldos fiveyear relationship with russian model irina shayk ended.ronaldo became a father to twins, born on  june  in the united states via surrogacy. he is currently in a relationship with argentineborn spanish model georgina rodrguez, who gave birth to a daughter on  november . the couple expected a pair of twins in . the male twin died during childbirth while the female twin survived.ronaldos father, jos, died of an alcoholismrelated liver condition at age  in september  when ronaldo was .in january , after ronaldo moved to saudi arabia with his family having been signed by saudi pro league side al nassr, the rulers of the muslimleaning kingdom made ronaldo an exception to the rule that unmarried couples are not allowed to live together in saudi arabia. an unnamed saudi lawyer told spanish news agency efe that the laws of the kingdom still prohibit cohabitation without a marriage contract, but saudi authorities have begun to turn a blind eye and stop prosecuting anyone, even though these laws are applied when there is a problem or a crime.ronaldo is of cape verdean descent through his greatgrandmother. he is a roman catholic.

ronaldo has said that he does not drink alcohol, and he received libel damages over a daily mirror article that reported him drinking heavily in a nightclub while recovering from an injury in july . he also does not have any tattoos as he regularly donates blood and bone marrow.

in july , ronaldo was charged with fraudulently evading almost  million in tax between  and , a claim he denied at the time. in june , ronaldo was given a twoyear suspended jail sentence and fined . million, later reduced to . million after reaching a deal with spanish authorities. the sentence can be served under probation, without any jail time, so long as he does not reoffend.ronaldo and another man were investigated by the british crown prosecution service after a  rape allegation was brought forward by two women. within days, the two women withdrew their allegation and scotland yard later issued a statement declaring there was not enough evidence for a prosecution.in april , it was reported that ronaldo was being investigated by the las vegas police department for an allegation by a woman that he had raped her in . documents, confirmed by ronaldos lawyers, state that ronaldo paid a woman us, in a nondisclosure settlement. ronaldo and his lawyers issued a lengthy statement denying all accusations, describing them as an intentional defamation campaign with parts significantly altered and/or completely fabricated, a claim which der spiegel categorically denied. in july , las vegas prosecutors said they would not charge ronaldo over allegations of rape; the statement added based upon a review of information at this time, the allegations of sexual assault against cristiano ronaldo cannot be proven beyond a reasonable doubt. the same woman, in september , filed a civil lawsuit in nevada accusing ronaldo of rape. the daily mirror, citing court documents, reported in  that the woman sought  million in damages from ronaldo. in october , federal magistrate judge daniel albregts recommended that the lawsuit be dismissed, citing that the womans lawyer, leslie stovall, acted in bad faith by asking for, receiving, and using football leaks documents to prosecute the case, despite the documents containing privileged communications between ronaldo and his lawyers. additionally, albregts stated that no evidence was found of ronaldos lawyers having intimidated the woman or impeded law enforcement during the  settlement with her. in june , the womans rape lawsuit was dismissed with prejudice in the united states district court for the district of nevada, as district judge jennifer a. dorsey ruled that stovalls repeated use of cyberhacked attorneyclient privileged documents were actions representing abuses and flagrant circumvention of the proper litigation process.

as of match played  november 

as of match played  october notes

sporting cp

supertaa cndido de oliveira manchester united

premier league , , 

fa cup 

football league cup , 

fa community shield 

uefa champions league 

fifa club world cup real madrid

la liga , 

copa del rey , 

supercopa de espaa , 

uefa champions league , , , 

uefa super cup , 

fifa club world cup , , juventus

serie a , 

coppa italia 

supercoppa italiana , al nassr

arab club champions cup portugal u

toulon tournament portugal

uefa european championship 

uefa nations league individual

fifa ballon dor/ballon dor , , , , 

fifa world player of the year 

the best fifa mens player , 

the best fifa special award for outstanding career achievement 

uefa mens player of the year award , , , 

uefa champions league top scorer , , , , , , 

european golden shoe , , , 

golden foot 

fifa club world cup golden ball 

fifa pusks award 

uefa european championship team of the tournament ; ; 

uefa european championship golden boot 

premier league player of the season , 

la liga best player 

serie a footballer of the year , 

premier league golden boot 

pichichi trophy , , 

capocannoniere 

fpf portuguese player of the year , , , , orders

 medal of merit, order of the immaculate conception of vila viosa 

 grand officer of the order of prince henry

 commander of the order of merit

cordo autonmico de distino

germany, officially the federal republic of germany, is a country in the western region of central europe. it is the secondmost populous country in europe after russia, and the most populous member state of the european union. germany is situated between the baltic and north seas to the north, and the alps to the south. its  constituent states are bordered by denmark to the north, poland and the czech republic to the east, austria and switzerland to the south, and france, luxembourg, belgium, and the netherlands to the west. the nations capital and most populous city is berlin and its main financial centre is frankfurt; the largest urban area is the ruhr.

various germanic tribes have inhabited the northern parts of modern germany since classical antiquity. a region named germania was documented before ad . in , the kingdom of germany formed the bulk of the holy roman empire. during the th century, northern german regions became the centre of the protestant reformation. following the napoleonic wars and the dissolution of the holy roman empire in , the german confederation was formed in .

formal unification of germany into the modern nationstate was commenced on  august  with the north german confederation treaty establishing the prussialed north german confederation later transformed in  into the german empire. after world war i and the german revolution of , the empire was in turn transformed into the semipresidential weimar republic. the nazi seizure of power in  led to the establishment of a totalitarian dictatorship, world war ii, and the holocaust. after the end of world war ii in europe and a period of allied occupation, in , germany as a whole was organized into two separate polities with limited sovereignty the federal republic of germany, generally known as west germany, and the german democratic republic, known as east germany, while berlin continued its de jure four power status. the federal republic of germany was a founding member of the european economic community and the european union, while the german democratic republic was a communist eastern bloc state and member of the warsaw pact. after the fall of communist ledgovernment in east germany, german reunification saw the former east german states join the federal republic of germany on  october .

germany has been described as a great power with a strong economy; it has the largest economy in europe, the worlds thirdlargest economy by nominal gdp and the fifthlargest by ppp. as a global power in industrial, scientific and technological sectors, it is both the worlds thirdlargest exporter and importer. as a developed country it offers social security, a universal health care system and a tuitionfree university education. germany is a member of the united nations, european union, nato, council of europe, g, g, and oecd. it has the thirdgreatest number of unesco world heritage sites.

the english word germany derives from the latin germania, which came into use after julius caesar adopted it for the peoples east of the rhine. the german term deutschland, originally diutisciu land  is derived from deutsch , descended from old high german diutisc of the people , originally used to distinguish the language of the common people from latin and its romance descendants. this in turn descends from protogermanic iudiskaz of the people , derived from eud, descended from protoindoeuropean tewth people, from which the word teutons also originates.

prehuman ancestors, the danuvius guggenmosi, who were present in germany over  million years ago, are theorized to be among the earliest ones to walk on two legs. ancient humans were present in germany at least , years ago. the first nonmodern human fossil  was discovered in the neander valley. similarly dated evidence of modern humans has been found in the swabian jura, including ,yearold flutes which are the oldest musical instruments ever found, the ,yearold lion man, and the ,yearold venus of hohle fels. the nebra sky disk, created during the european bronze age, has been attributed to a german site.

the germanic peoples are thought to date from the nordic bronze age, early iron age, or the jastorf culture. from southern scandinavia and northern germany, they expanded south, east, and west, coming into contact with the celtic, iranian, baltic, and slavic tribes.under augustus, the roman empire began to invade lands inhabited by the germanic tribes, creating a shortlived roman province of germania between the rhine and elbe rivers. in  ad, three roman legions were defeated by arminius in the battle of the teutoburg forest. the outcome of this battle dissuaded the romans from their ambition of conquering germania, and is thus considered one of the most important events in european history. by  ad, when tacitus wrote germania, germanic tribes had settled along the rhine and the danube , occupying most of modern germany. however, badenwrttemberg, southern bavaria, southern hesse and the western rhineland had been incorporated into roman provinces.around , germanic peoples broke into romancontrolled lands. after the invasion of the huns in , and with the decline of rome from , germanic tribes moved farther southwest the franks established the frankish kingdom and pushed east to subjugate saxony and bavaria, and areas of what is today eastern germany were inhabited by western slavic tribes.

charlemagne founded the carolingian empire in ; it was divided in . the eastern successor kingdom of east francia stretched from the rhine in the west to the elbe river in the east and from the north sea to the alps. subsequently, the holy roman empire emerged from it. the ottonian rulers  consolidated several major duchies. in , gregory v became the first german pope, appointed by his cousin otto iii, whom he shortly after crowned holy roman emperor. the holy roman empire absorbed northern italy and burgundy under the salian emperors , although the emperors lost power through the investiture controversy.under the hohenstaufen emperors , german princes encouraged german settlement to the south and east . members of the hanseatic league, mostly north german towns, prospered in the expansion of trade. the population declined starting with the great famine in , followed by the black death of . the golden bull issued in  provided the constitutional structure of the empire and codified the election of the emperor by seven princeelectors.johannes gutenberg introduced moveabletype printing to europe, laying the basis for the democratization of knowledge. in , martin luther incited the protestant reformation and his translation of the bible began the standardization of the language; the  peace of augsburg tolerated the evangelical faith , but also decreed that the faith of the prince was to be the faith of his subjects . from the cologne war through the thirty years wars , religious conflict devastated german lands and significantly reduced the population.the peace of westphalia ended religious warfare among the imperial estates; their mostly germanspeaking rulers were able to choose catholicism, lutheranism, or calvinism as their official religion. the legal system initiated by a series of imperial reforms  provided for considerable local autonomy and a stronger imperial diet. the house of habsburg held the imperial crown from  until the death of charles vi in . following the war of the austrian succession and the treaty of aixlachapelle, charles vis daughter maria theresa ruled as empress consort when her husband, francis i, became emperor.from , dualism between the austrian habsburg monarchy and the kingdom of prussia dominated german history. in , , and , prussia and austria, along with the russian empire, agreed to the partitions of poland. during the period of the french revolutionary wars, the napoleonic era and the subsequent final meeting of the imperial diet, most of the free imperial cities were annexed by dynastic territories; the ecclesiastical territories were secularised and annexed. in  the imperium was dissolved; france, russia, prussia, and the habsburgs  competed for hegemony in the german states during the napoleonic wars.

following the fall of napoleon, the congress of vienna founded the german confederation, a loose league of  sovereign states. the appointment of the emperor of austria as the permanent president reflected the congresss rejection of prussias rising influence. disagreement within restoration politics partly led to the rise of liberal movements, followed by new measures of repression by austrian statesman klemens von metternich. the zollverein, a tariff union, furthered economic unity. in light of revolutionary movements in europe, intellectuals and commoners started the revolutions of  in the german states, raising the german question. king frederick william iv of prussia was offered the title of emperor, but with a loss of power; he rejected the crown and the proposed constitution, a temporary setback for the movement.king william i appointed otto von bismarck as the minister president of prussia in . bismarck successfully concluded the war with denmark in ; the subsequent decisive prussian victory in the austroprussian war of  enabled him to create the north german confederation which excluded austria. after the defeat of france in the francoprussian war, the german princes proclaimed the founding of the german empire in . prussia was the dominant constituent state of the new empire; the king of prussia ruled as its kaiser, and berlin became its capital.in the grnderzeit period following the unification of germany, bismarcks foreign policy as chancellor of germany secured germanys position as a great nation by forging alliances and avoiding war. however, under wilhelm ii, germany took an imperialistic course, leading to friction with neighbouring countries. a dual alliance was created with the multinational realm of austriahungary; the triple alliance of  included italy. britain, france and russia also concluded alliances to protect against habsburg interference with russian interests in the balkans or german interference against france. at the berlin conference in , germany claimed several colonies including german east africa, german south west africa, togoland, and kamerun. later, germany further expanded its colonial empire to include holdings in the pacific and china. the colonial government in south west africa , from  to , carried out the annihilation of the local herero and namaqua peoples as punishment for an uprising; this was the th centurys first genocide.the assassination of austrias crown prince on  june  provided the pretext for austriahungary to attack serbia and trigger world war i. after four years of warfare, in which approximately two million german soldiers were killed, a general armistice ended the fighting. in the german revolution , emperor wilhelm ii and the ruling princes abdicated their positions, and germany was declared a federal republic. germanys new leadership signed the treaty of versailles in , accepting defeat by the allies. germans perceived the treaty as humiliating, which was seen by historians as influential in the rise of adolf hitler. germany lost around  of its european territory and ceded all of its colonial possessions in africa and the pacific.

on  august , president friedrich ebert signed the democratic weimar constitution. in the subsequent struggle for power, communists seized power in bavaria, but conservative elements elsewhere attempted to overthrow the republic in the kapp putsch. street fighting in the major industrial centres, the occupation of the ruhr by belgian and french troops, and a period of hyperinflation followed. a debt restructuring plan and the creation of a new currency in  ushered in the golden twenties, an era of artistic innovation and liberal cultural life.the worldwide great depression hit germany in . chancellor heinrich brnings government pursued a policy of fiscal austerity and deflation which caused unemployment of nearly  by . the nazi party led by adolf hitler became the largest party in the reichstag after a special election in  and hindenburg appointed hitler as chancellor of germany on  january . after the reichstag fire, a decree abrogated basic civil rights and the first nazi concentration camp opened. on  march , the enabling act gave hitler unrestricted legislative power, overriding the constitution, and marked the beginning of nazi germany. his government established a centralised totalitarian state, withdrew from the league of nations, and dramatically increased the countrys rearmament. a governmentsponsored programme for economic renewal focused on public works, the most famous of which was the autobahn.in , the regime withdrew from the treaty of versailles and introduced the nuremberg laws which targeted jews and other minorities. germany also reacquired control of the saarland in , remilitarised the rhineland in , annexed austria in , annexed the sudetenland in  with the munich agreement, and in violation of the agreement occupied czechoslovakia in march . kristallnacht  saw the burning of synagogues, the destruction of jewish businesses, and mass arrests of jewish people.in august , hitlers government negotiated the molotovribbentrop pact that divided eastern europe into german and soviet spheres of influence. on  september , germany invaded poland, beginning world war ii in europe; britain and france declared war on germany on  september. in the spring of , germany conquered denmark and norway, the netherlands, belgium, luxembourg, and france, forcing the french government to sign an armistice. the british repelled german air attacks in the battle of britain in the same year. in , german troops invaded yugoslavia, greece and the soviet union. by , germany and its allies controlled most of continental europe and north africa, but following the soviet victory at the battle of stalingrad, the allied reconquest of north africa and invasion of italy in , german forces suffered repeated military defeats. in , the soviets pushed into eastern europe; the western allies landed in france and entered germany despite a final german counteroffensive. following hitlers suicide during the battle of berlin, germany signed the surrender document on  may , ending world war ii in europe and nazi germany. following the end of the war, surviving nazi officials were tried for war crimes at the nuremberg trials.in what later became known as the holocaust, the german government persecuted minorities, including interning them in concentration and death camps across europe. in total  million people were systematically murdered, including  million jews, at least , romani, , disabled people, thousands of jehovahs witnesses, thousands of homosexuals, and hundreds of thousands of political and religious opponents. nazi policies in germanoccupied countries resulted in the deaths of an estimated . million poles, . million ukrainians,  million belarusians and . million soviet prisoners of war. german military casualties have been estimated at . million, and around , german civilians died. around  million ethnic germans were expelled from across eastern europe, and germany lost roughly onequarter of its prewar territory.

after nazi germany surrendered, the allies de jure abolished german state and partitioned berlin and germanys remaining territory into four occupation zones. the western sectors, controlled by france, the united kingdom, and the united states, were merged on  may  to form the federal republic of germany ; on  october , the soviet zone became the german democratic republic  . they were informally known as west germany and east germany. east germany selected east berlin as its capital, while west germany chose bonn as a provisional capital, to emphasise its stance that the twostate solution was temporary.west germany was established as a federal parliamentary republic with a social market economy. starting in  west germany became a major recipient of reconstruction aid under the american marshall plan. konrad adenauer was elected the first federal chancellor of germany in . the country enjoyed prolonged economic growth  beginning in the early s. west germany joined nato in  and was a founding member of the european economic community. on  january , the saarland joined west germany.east germany was an eastern bloc state under political and military control by the soviet union via occupation forces and the warsaw pact. although east germany claimed to be a democracy, political power was exercised solely by leading members  of the communistcontrolled socialist unity party of germany, supported by the stasi, an immense secret service. while east german propaganda was based on the benefits of the gdrs social programmes and the alleged threat of a west german invasion, many of its citizens looked to the west for freedom and prosperity. the berlin wall, built in , prevented east german citizens from escaping to west germany, becoming a symbol of the cold war.tensions between east and west germany were reduced in the late s by chancellor willy brandts ostpolitik. in , hungary decided to dismantle the iron curtain and open its border with austria, causing the emigration of thousands of east germans to west germany via hungary and austria. this had devastating effects on the gdr, where regular mass demonstrations received increasing support. in an effort to help retain east germany as a state, the east german authorities eased border restrictions, but this actually led to an acceleration of the wende reform process culminating in the two plus four treaty under which germany regained full sovereignty. this permitted german reunification on  october , with the accession of the five reestablished states of the former gdr. the fall of the wall in  became a symbol of the fall of communism, the dissolution of the soviet union, german reunification and die wende .

united germany was considered the enlarged continuation of west germany so it retained its memberships in international organisations. based on the berlin/bonn act , berlin again became the capital of germany, while bonn obtained the unique status of a bundesstadt  retaining some federal ministries. the relocation of the government was completed in , and modernisation of the east german economy was scheduled to last until .since reunification, germany has taken a more active role in the european union, signing the maastricht treaty in  and the lisbon treaty in , and cofounding the eurozone. germany sent a peacekeeping force to secure stability in the balkans and sent german troops to afghanistan as part of a nato effort to provide security in that country after the ousting of the taliban.in the  elections, angela merkel became the first female chancellor. in , the german government approved a  billion stimulus plan. among the major german political projects of the early st century are the advancement of european integration, the energy transition  for a sustainable energy supply, the debt brake for balanced budgets, measures to increase the fertility rate , and hightech strategies for the transition of the german economy, summarised as industry .. during the  european migrant crisis, the country took in over a million refugees and migrants.

germany is the seventhlargest country in europe; bordering denmark to the north, poland and the czech republic to the east, austria to the southeast, and switzerland to the southsouthwest. france, luxembourg and belgium are situated to the west, with the netherlands to the northwest. germany is also bordered by the north sea and, at the northnortheast, by the baltic sea. german territory covers , km , consisting of , km  of land and , km  of water.

elevation ranges from the mountains of the alps  in the south to the shores of the north sea  in the northwest and the baltic sea  in the northeast. the forested uplands of central germany and the lowlands of northern germany  are traversed by such major rivers as the rhine, danube and elbe. significant natural resources include iron ore, coal, potash, timber, lignite, uranium, copper, natural gas, salt, and nickel.

most of germany has a temperate climate, ranging from oceanic in the north and west to continental in the east and southeast. winters range from the cold in the southern alps to cool and are generally overcast with limited precipitation, while summers can vary from hot and dry to cool and rainy. the northern regions have prevailing westerly winds that bring in moist air from the north sea, moderating the temperature and increasing precipitation. conversely, the southeast regions have more extreme temperatures.from february , average monthly temperatures in germany ranged from a low of . c  in january  to a high of . c  in june . average monthly precipitation ranged from  litres per square metre in february and april  to  litres per square metre in february . average monthly hours of sunshine ranged from  in november  to  in june .

the territory of germany can be divided into five terrestrial ecoregions atlantic mixed forests, baltic mixed forests, central european mixed forests, western european broadleaf forests, and alps conifer and mixed forests. as of   of germanys land area is devoted to agriculture, while  is forested and  is covered by settlements or infrastructure.plants and animals include those generally common to central europe. according to the national forest inventory, beeches, oaks, and other deciduous trees constitute just over  of the forests; roughly  are conifers, particularly spruce and pine. there are many species of ferns, flowers, fungi, and mosses. wild animals include roe deer, wild boar, mouflon , fox, badger, hare, and small numbers of the eurasian beaver. the blue cornflower was once a german national symbol.the  national parks in germany include the jasmund national park, the vorpommern lagoon area national park, the mritz national park, the wadden sea national parks, the harz national park, the hainich national park, the black forest national park, the saxon switzerland national park, the bavarian forest national park and the berchtesgaden national park. in addition, there are  biosphere reserves, and  nature parks. more than  zoos and animal parks operate in germany. the berlin zoo, which opened in , is the oldest in germany, and claims the most comprehensive collection of species in the world.

germany is a federal, parliamentary, representative democratic republic. federal legislative power is vested in the parliament consisting of the bundestag  and bundesrat , which together form the legislative body. the bundestag is elected through direct elections using the mixedmember proportional representation system. the members of the bundesrat represent and are appointed by the governments of the sixteen federated states. the german political system operates under a framework laid out in the  constitution known as the grundgesetz . amendments generally require a twothirds majority of both the bundestag and the bundesrat; the fundamental principles of the constitution, as expressed in the articles guaranteeing human dignity, the separation of powers, the federal structure, and the rule of law, are valid in perpetuity.the president, currently frankwalter steinmeier, is the head of state and invested primarily with representative responsibilities and powers. he is elected by the bundesversammlung , an institution consisting of the members of the bundestag and an equal number of state delegates. the secondhighest official in the german order of precedence is the bundestagsprsident , who is elected by the bundestag and responsible for overseeing the daily sessions of the body. the thirdhighest official and the head of government is the chancellor, who is appointed by the bundesprsident after being elected by the party or coalition with the most seats in the bundestag. the chancellor, currently olaf scholz, is the head of government and exercises executive power through his cabinet.since , the party system has been dominated by the christian democratic union and the social democratic party of germany. so far every chancellor has been a member of one of these parties. however, the smaller liberal free democratic party and the alliance /the greens have also been junior partners in coalition governments. since , the democratic socialist party the left has been a staple in the german bundestag, though they have never been part of the federal government. in the  german federal election, the rightwing populist alternative for germany gained enough votes to attain representation in the parliament for the first time.

germany is a federation and comprises sixteen constituent states which are collectively referred to as lnder. each state  has its own constitution, and is largely autonomous in regard to its internal organisation. as of  germany is divided into  districts  at a municipal level; these consist of  rural districts and  urban districts.

germany has a civil law system based on roman law with some references to germanic law. the bundesverfassungsgericht  is the german supreme court responsible for constitutional matters, with power of judicial review. germanys supreme court system is specialised for civil and criminal cases, the highest court of appeal is the inquisitorial federal court of justice, and for other affairs the courts are the federal labour court, the federal social court, the federal fiscal court and the federal administrative court.criminal and private laws are codified on the national level in the strafgesetzbuch and the brgerliches gesetzbuch respectively. the german penal system seeks the rehabilitation of the criminal and the protection of the public. except for petty crimes, which are tried before a single professional judge, and serious political crimes, all charges are tried before mixed tribunals on which lay judges  sit side by side with professional judges.germany has a low murder rate with . murders per , as of . in , the overall crime rate fell to its lowest since .samesex marriage has been legal in germany since , and lgbt rights are generally protected in the nation.

germany has a network of  diplomatic missions abroad and maintains relations with more than  countries. germany is a member of nato, the oecd, the g, the g, the world bank and the imf. it has played an influential role in the european union since its inception and has maintained a strong alliance with france and all neighbouring countries since . germany promotes the creation of a more unified european political, economic and security apparatus. the governments of germany and the united states are close political allies. cultural ties and economic interests have crafted a bond between the two countries resulting in atlanticism. after , germany and russia worked together to establish a strategic partnership in which energy development became one of the most important factors. as a result of the cooperation, germany imported most of its natural gas and crude oil from russia.the development policy of germany is an independent area of foreign policy. it is formulated by the federal ministry for economic cooperation and development and carried out by the implementing organisations. the german government sees development policy as a joint responsibility of the international community. it was the worlds secondbiggest aid donor in  after the united states.

germanys military, the bundeswehr , is organised into the heer , marine , luftwaffe , zentraler sanittsdienst der bundeswehr , streitkrftebasis  and cyber und informationsraum  branches. in absolute terms, german military expenditure is the eighthhighest in the world. in , military spending was at . billion, about . of the countrys gdp, well below the nato target of . however, in response to the  russian invasion of ukraine, chancellor olaf scholz announced that german military expenditure would be increased past the nato target of , along with a onetime  infusion of  billion euros, representing almost double the  billion euro military budget for .as of january , the bundeswehr has a strength of , active soldiers and , civilians. reservists are available to the armed forces and participate in defence exercises and deployments abroad. until , military service was compulsory for men at age , but this has been officially suspended and replaced with a voluntary service. since  women may serve in all functions of service without restriction. according to the stockholm international peace research institute, germany was the fourthlargest exporter of major arms in the world from  to .in peacetime, the bundeswehr is commanded by the minister of defence. in state of defence, the chancellor would become commanderinchief of the bundeswehr. the role of the bundeswehr is described in the constitution of germany as defensive only. but after a ruling of the federal constitutional court in , the term defence has been defined to not only include protection of the borders of germany, but also crisis reaction and conflict prevention, or more broadly as guarding the security of germany anywhere in the world. as of , the german military has about , troops stationed in foreign countries as part of international peacekeeping forces, including about , supporting operations against daesh,  in the natoled resolute support mission in afghanistan, and  in kosovo.

germany has a social market economy with a highly skilled labour force, a low level of corruption, and a high level of innovation. it is the worlds thirdlargest exporter and thirdlargest importer, and has the largest economy in europe, which is also the worlds fourthlargest economy by nominal gdp, and the fifthlargest by ppp. its gdp per capita measured in purchasing power standards amounts to  of the eu average. the service sector contributes approximately  of the total gdp, industry , and agriculture  as of . the unemployment rate published by eurostat amounts to . as of january , which is the fourthlowest in the eu.germany is part of the european single market which represents more than  million consumers. in , the country accounted for  of the eurozone economy according to the international monetary fund. germany introduced the common european currency, the euro, in . its monetary policy is set by the european central bank, which is headquartered in frankfurt.being home to the modern car, the automotive industry in germany is regarded as one of the most competitive and innovative in the world, and is the sixthlargest by production as of . germany is home to volkswagen group, the worlds secondlargest automotive manufacturer in  by both vehicle production and sales, and is the thirdlargest exporter of cars as of .the top ten exports of germany are vehicles, machinery, chemical goods, electronic products, electrical equipments, pharmaceuticals, transport equipments, basic metals, food products, and rubber and plastics.of the worlds  largest stockmarketlisted companies measured by revenue in , the fortune global ,  are headquartered in germany.  major germanybased companies are included in the dax, the german stock market index which is operated by frankfurt stock exchange. wellknown international brands include mercedesbenz, bmw, volkswagen, audi, siemens, allianz, adidas, porsche, bosch and deutsche telekom. berlin is a hub for startup companies and has become the leading location for venture capital funded firms in the european union. germany is recognised for its large portion of specialised small and medium enterprises, known as the mittelstand model. these companies represent  of the global market leaders in their segments, labelled hidden champions.research and development efforts form an integral part of the german economy. in , germany ranked fourth globally in terms of number of science and engineering research papers published. research institutions in germany include the max planck society, the helmholtz association, and the fraunhofer society and the leibniz association. germany is the largest contributor to the european space agency. germany was ranked th in the global innovation index in .

with its central position in europe, germany is a transport hub for the continent. its road network is among the densest in europe. the motorway  is widely known for having no general federally mandated speed limit for some classes of vehicles. the intercity express or ice train network serves major german cities as well as destinations in neighbouring countries with speeds up to  km/h . the largest german airports are frankfurt airport and munich airport. the port of hamburg is one of the twenty largest container ports in the world.in , germany was the worlds seventhlargest consumer of energy. all nuclear power plants were phased out in . it meets the countrys power demands using  renewable sources, and it has been called an early leader in solar and offshore wind. germany is committed to the paris agreement and several other treaties promoting biodiversity, low emission standards, and water management. the countrys household recycling rate is among the highest in the worldat around . the countrys greenhouse gas emissions per capita were the ninthhighest in the eu in , but these numbers have been trending downward. the german energy transition  is the recognised move to a sustainable economy by means of energy efficiency and renewable energy.

germany is the ninthmost visited country in the world as of , with . million visits. domestic and international travel and tourism combined directly contribute over . billion to german gdp. including indirect and induced impacts, the industry supports . million jobs.germanys most visited and popular landmarks include cologne cathedral, the brandenburg gate, the reichstag, the dresden frauenkirche, neuschwanstein castle, heidelberg castle, the wartburg, and sanssouci palace. the europapark near freiburg is europes secondmost popular theme park resort.

with a population of . million according to the  german census, rising to . million as of , germany is the most populous country in the european union, the secondmost populous country in europe after russia, and the nineteenthmost populous country in the world. its population density stands at  inhabitants per square kilometre . the fertility rate of . children born per woman  is below the replacement rate of . and is one of the lowest fertility rates in the world. since the s, germanys death rate has exceeded its birth rate. however, germany is witnessing increased birth rates and migration rates since the beginning of the s. germany has the third oldest population in the world, with an average age of . years.four sizeable groups of people are referred to as national minorities because their ancestors have lived in their respective regions for centuries there is a danish minority in the northernmost state of schleswigholstein; the sorbs, a slavic population, are in the lusatia region of saxony and brandenburg; the roma and sinti live throughout the country; and the frisians are concentrated in schleswigholsteins western coast and in the northwestern part of lower saxony.after the united states, germany is the secondmost popular immigration destination in the world. the majority of migrants live in western germany, in particular in urban areas. of the countrys residents, . million people  were of immigrant or partially immigrant descent in  . in , following the  refugee crisis, the population division of the united nations department of economic and social affairs listed germany as host to the secondhighest number of international migrants worldwide, about  or  million of all  million migrants. as of , germany ranks seventh among eu countries in terms of the percentage of migrants in the countrys population, at .. refugee crises have resulted in substantial population increases. for example, the major influx of ukrainian immigrants following the  russian invasion of ukraine, meaning over . million refugees from ukraine were recorded in germany as of april .germany has a number of large cities. there are  officially recognised metropolitan regions. the countrys largest city is berlin, while its largest urban area is the ruhr.

christianity was introduced to the area of modern germany by  ad and became fully christianized by the time of charlemagne in the eighth and ninth century. after the reformation started by martin luther in the early th century, many people left the catholic church and became protestant, mainly lutheran and calvinist.according to the  census, christianity was the largest religion in germany, with . of respondents identifying as christian, of which . were not church members. . declared themselves as protestants, including members of the protestant church in germany  and the free churches ; . declared themselves as roman catholics, and orthodox believers constituted .. according to data from , the catholic church and the evangelical church claimed . and ., respectively, of the population. islam is the secondlargest religion in the country.in the  census, . of respondents  gave their religion as islam, but this figure is deemed unreliable because a disproportionate number of adherents of this faith  are likely to have made use of their right not to answer the question. most of the muslims are sunnis and alevites from turkey, but there are a small number of shiites, ahmadiyyas and other denominations. other religions comprise less than one per cent of germanys population.a study in  estimated that  of the population are not members of any religious organization or denomination, though up to a third may still consider themselves religious. irreligion in germany is strongest in the former east germany, which used to be predominantly protestant before the enforcement of state atheism, and in major metropolitan areas.

german is the official and predominant spoken language in germany. it is one of  official and working languages of the european union, and one of the three procedural languages of the european commission. german is the most widely spoken first language in the european union, with around  million native speakers.recognised native minority languages in germany are danish, low german, low rhenish, sorbian, romani, north frisian and saterland frisian; they are officially protected by the european charter for regional or minority languages. the most used immigrant languages are turkish, arabic, kurdish, polish, greek, serbocroatian, bulgarian and other balkan languages, as well as russian. germans are typically multilingual  of german citizens claim to be able to communicate in at least one foreign language and  in at least two.

responsibility for educational supervision in germany is primarily organised within the individual states. optional kindergarten education is provided for all children between three and six years old, after which school attendance is compulsory for at least nine years depending on the state. primary education usually lasts for four to six years. secondary schooling is divided into tracks based on whether students pursue academic or vocational education. a system of apprenticeship called duale ausbildung leads to a skilled qualification which is almost comparable to an academic degree. it allows students in vocational training to learn in a company as well as in a staterun trade school. this model is well regarded and reproduced all around the world.most of the german universities are public institutions, and students traditionally study without fee payment. the general requirement for attending university is the abitur. according to an oecd report in , germany is the worlds third leading destination for international study. the established universities in germany include some of the oldest in the world, with heidelberg university , leipzig university  and the university of rostock  being the oldest. the humboldt university of berlin, founded in  by the liberal educational reformer wilhelm von humboldt, became the academic model for many western universities. in the contemporary era germany has developed eleven universities of excellence.

germanys system of hospitals, called krankenhuser, dates from medieval times, and today, germany has the worlds oldest universal health care system, dating from bismarcks social legislation of the s. since the s, reforms and provisions have ensured a balanced health care system. the population is covered by a health insurance plan provided by statute, with criteria allowing some groups to opt for a private health insurance contract. according to the world health organization , germanys health care system was  governmentfunded and  privately funded as of . in , germany spent . of its gdp on health care.germany ranked st in the world in  in life expectancy with . years for men and . years for women according to the who, and it had a very low infant mortality rate . in , the principal cause of death was cardiovascular disease, at . obesity in germany has been increasingly cited as a major health issue. a  study showed that  per cent of the adult german population was overweight or obese.

culture in german states has been shaped by major intellectual and popular currents in europe, both religious and secular. historically, germany has been called das land der dichter und denker , because of the major role its scientists, writers and philosophers have played in the development of western thought. a global opinion poll for the bbc revealed that germany is recognised for having the most positive influence in the world in  and .germany is well known for such folk festival traditions as the oktoberfest and christmas customs, which include advent wreaths, christmas pageants, christmas trees, stollen cakes, and other practices. as of  unesco inscribed  properties in germany on the world heritage list. there are a number of public holidays in germany determined by each state;  october has been a national day of germany since , celebrated as the tag der deutschen einheit .

german classical music includes works by some of the worlds most wellknown composers. dieterich buxtehude, johann sebastian bach and georg friedrich hndel were influential composers of the baroque period. ludwig van beethoven was a crucial figure in the transition between the classical and romantic eras. carl maria von weber, felix mendelssohn, robert schumann and johannes brahms were significant romantic composers. richard wagner was known for his operas. richard strauss was a leading composer of the late romantic and early modern eras. karlheinz stockhausen and wolfgang rihm are important composers of the th and early st centuries.as of , germany was the secondlargest music market in europe, and fourthlargest in the world. german popular music of the th and st centuries includes the movements of neue deutsche welle, pop, ostrock, heavy metal/rock, punk, pop rock, indie, volksmusik , schlager pop and german hip hop. german electronic music gained global influence, with kraftwerk and tangerine dream pioneering in this genre. djs and artists of the techno and house music scenes of germany have become well known .

german painters have influenced western art. albrecht drer, hans holbein the younger, matthias grnewald and lucas cranach the elder were important german artists of the renaissance, johann baptist zimmermann of the baroque, caspar david friedrich and carl spitzweg of romanticism, max liebermann of impressionism and max ernst of surrealism. several german art groups formed in the th century; die brcke  and der blaue reiter  influenced the development of expressionism in munich and berlin. the new objectivity arose in response to expressionism during the weimar republic. after world war ii, broad trends in german art include neoexpressionism and the new leipzig school.german designers became early leaders of modern product design. the berlin fashion week and the fashion trade fair bread  butter are held twice a year.architectural contributions from germany include the carolingian and ottonian styles, which were precursors of romanesque. brick gothic is a distinctive medieval style that evolved in germany. also in renaissance and baroque art, regional and typically german elements evolved . vernacular architecture in germany is often identified by its timber framing  traditions and varies across regions, and among carpentry styles. when industrialisation spread across europe, classicism and a distinctive style of historicism developed in germany, sometimes referred to as grnderzeit style. expressionist architecture developed in the s in germany and influenced art deco and other modern styles. germany was particularly important in the early modernist movement it is the home of werkbund initiated by hermann muthesius , and of the bauhaus movement founded by walter gropius. ludwig mies van der rohe became one of the worlds most renowned architects in the second half of the th century; he conceived of the glass faade skyscraper. renowned contemporary architects and offices include pritzker prize winners gottfried bhm and frei otto.

german literature can be traced back to the middle ages and the works of writers such as walther von der vogelweide and wolfram von eschenbach. wellknown german authors include johann wolfgang von goethe, friedrich schiller, gotthold ephraim lessing and theodor fontane. the collections of folk tales published by the brothers grimm popularised german folklore on an international level. the grimms also gathered and codified regional variants of the german language, grounding their work in historical principles; their deutsches wrterbuch, or german dictionary, sometimes called the grimm dictionary, was begun in  and the first volumes published in .influential authors of the th century include gerhart hauptmann, thomas mann, hermann hesse, heinrich bll, and gnter grass. the german book market is the thirdlargest in the world, after the united states and china. the frankfurt book fair is the most important in the world for international deals and trading, with a tradition spanning over  years. the leipzig book fair also retains a major position in europe.german philosophy is historically significant gottfried leibnizs contributions to rationalism; the enlightenment philosophy by immanuel kant; the establishment of classical german idealism by johann gottlieb fichte, georg wilhelm friedrich hegel and friedrich wilhelm joseph schelling; arthur schopenhauers composition of metaphysical pessimism; the formulation of communist theory by karl marx and friedrich engels; friedrich nietzsches development of perspectivism; gottlob freges contributions to the dawn of analytic philosophy; martin heideggers works on being; oswald spenglers historical philosophy; and the development of the frankfurt school have all been very influential.

the largest internationally operating media companies in germany are the bertelsmann enterprise, axel springer se and prosiebensat. media. germanys television market is the largest in europe, with some  million tv households. around  of german households have cable or satellite tv, with a variety of freetoview public and commercial channels. there are more than  public and private radio stations in germany; germanys national radio network is the deutschlandradio and the public deutsche welle is the main german radio and television broadcaster in foreign languages. germanys print market of newspapers and magazines is the largest in europe. the papers with the highest circulation are bild, sddeutsche zeitung, frankfurter allgemeine zeitung and die welt. the largest magazines include adac motorwelt and der spiegel. germany has a large video gaming market, with over  million players nationwide. the gamescom is the worlds largest gaming convention.german cinema has made major technical and artistic contributions to film. the first works of the skladanowsky brothers were shown to an audience in . the renowned babelsberg studio in potsdam was established in , thus being the first largescale film studio in the world. early german cinema was particularly influential with german expressionists such as robert wiene and friedrich wilhelm murnau. director fritz langs metropolis  is referred to as the first major sciencefiction film. after , many of the films of the immediate postwar period can be characterised as trmmerfilm . east german film was dominated by stateowned film studio defa, while the dominant genre in west germany was the heimatfilm . during the s and s, new german cinema directors such as volker schlndorff, werner herzog, wim wenders, and rainer werner fassbinder brought west german auteur cinema to critical acclaim.

the academy award for best foreign language film  went to the german production the tin drum  in , to nowhere in africa  in , and to the lives of others  in . various germans won an oscar for their performances in other films. the annual european film awards ceremony is held every other year in berlin, home of the european film academy. the berlin international film festival, known as berlinale, awarding the golden bear and held annually since , is one of the worlds leading film festivals. the lolas are annually awarded in berlin, at the german film awards.

german cuisine varies from region to region and often neighbouring regions share some culinary similarities, including with the southern regions of bavaria and swabia, switzerland, and austria. international varieties such as pizza, sushi, chinese food, greek food, indian cuisine, and doner kebab are popular.

bread is a significant part of german cuisine and german bakeries produce about  main types of bread and , types of pastries and rolls . german cheeses account for about  of all cheese produced in europe. in  over  of all meat produced in germany was either pork, chicken or beef. germans produce their ubiquitous sausages in almost , varieties, including bratwursts and weisswursts.the national alcoholic drink is beer. german beer consumption per person stands at  litres  in  and remains among the highest in the world. german beer purity regulations date back to the th century. wine has become popular in many parts of the country, especially close to german wine regions. in , germany was the ninthlargest wine producer in the world.the  michelin guide awarded eleven restaurants in germany three stars, giving the country a cumulative total of  stars.

football is the most popular sport in germany. with more than  million official members, the german football association  is the largest singlesport organisation worldwide, and the german top league, the bundesliga, attracts the secondhighest average attendance of all professional sports leagues in the world. the german mens national football team won the fifa world cup in , , , and , the uefa european championship in ,  and , and the fifa confederations cup in .germany is one of the leading motor sports countries in the world. constructors like bmw and mercedes are prominent manufacturers in motor sport. porsche has won the  hours of le mans race  times, and audi  times . the driver michael schumacher has set many motor sport records during his career, having won seven formula one world drivers championships. sebastian vettel is also among the most successful formula one drivers of all time.german athletes historically have been successful contenders in the olympic games, ranking third in an alltime olympic games medal count when combining east and west german medals prior to german reunification. in  berlin hosted the summer games and the winter games in garmischpartenkirchen. munich hosted the summer games of .

bruce lee  was a hong kongamerican martial artist and actor whose career spanned hong kong and the united states. he was the founder of jeet kune do, a hybrid martial arts philosophy drawing from different combat disciplines that is sometimes credited with paving the way for modern mixed martial arts . lee is considered by some commentators and martial artists to be the most influential martial artist of all time and a pop culture icon of the th century, who bridged the gap between east and west. he is credited with promoting hong kong action cinema and helping to change the way chinese people were presented in american films.born in san francisco and raised in british hong kong, lee was introduced to the hong kong film industry as a child actor by his father. however, these were not martial arts films. his early martial arts experience included wing chun , tai chi, boxing , and apparently frequent street fighting . in , lee moved to seattle. in , he enrolled in the university of washington. it was during this time in the united states that he began considering making money by teaching martial arts, even though he aspired to have a career in acting. he opened his first martial arts school, operated out of home in seattle. after later adding a second school in oakland, california, he once drew significant attention at the  long beach international karate championships of california by making demonstrations and speaking. he subsequently moved to los angeles to teach, where his students included chuck norris, sharon tate, and kareem abduljabbar. in the s, his hong kong and hollywoodproduced films elevated the hong kong martial arts films to a new level of popularity and acclaim, sparking a surge of western interest in chinese martial arts. the direction and tone of his films dramatically influenced and changed martial arts and martial arts films worldwide.he is noted for his roles in five featurelength hong kong martial arts films in the early s lo weis the big boss  and fist of fury ; golden harvests the way of the dragon , directed and written by lee; and golden harvest and warner brothers enter the dragon  and the game of death , both directed by robert clouse. lee became an iconic figure known throughout the world, particularly among the chinese, based upon his portrayal of chinese nationalism in his films, and among asian americans for defying asian stereotypes in the united states. having initially learnt wing chun, tai chi, boxing, and street fighting, he combined them with other influences from various sources into the spirit of his personal martial arts philosophy, which he dubbed jeet kune do .lee died in july , aged . since his death, lee has continued to be a prominent influence on modern combat sports, including judo, karate, mixed martial arts, and boxing, as well as modern popular culture, including film, television, comics, animation, and video games. time named lee one of the  most important people of the th century.

bruce lees birth name was lee junfan.

his father lee hoichuen was a famous cantonese opera singer based in hong kong. his mother grace ho was born in shanghai, and she was of eurasian ancestry. in december , his parents traveled to california for an international opera tour in chinatown, san francisco. he was born there on november , , allowing him to claim u.s. citizenship due to the united states jus soli citizenship laws. at four months old , the lee family returned to hong kong. soon after, the lee family experienced unexpected hardships over the next four years as japan, in the midst of world war ii, launched a surprise attack on hong kong in december  and ruled the city for the next four years.lees maternal grandfather was cantonese, his maternal grandmother was english and his maternal greatuncle, robert hotung, was a successful hong kong businessman of dutch jewish and cantonese descent.

lees father lee hoichuen was a famous cantonese opera star. as a result, the junior lee was introduced to the world of cinema at a very young age and appeared in several films as a child. lee had his first role as a baby who was carried onto the stage in the film golden gate girl. he took his chinese stage name as , lit. lee the little dragon, for the fact that he was born in both the hour and the year of the dragon by the chinese zodiac.as a nineyearold, he costarred with his father in the kid in , which was based on a comic book character and was his first leading role. by the time he was , he had appeared in  films. after attending tak sun school , lee entered the primary school division of the catholic la salle college at age .

in , due to poor academic performance and possibly poor conduct, he was transferred to st. francis xaviers college, where he was mentored by brother edward muss, f.m.s., a bavarianborn teacher and coach of the school boxing team. after lee was involved in several street fights, his parents decided that he needed to be trained in the martial arts.

in , lees friend william cheung introduced him to ip man, but he was rejected from learning wing chun kung fu under him because of the longstanding rule in the chinese martial arts world not to teach foreigners.his one quarter european background from his mothers side was an initial obstacle towards his wing chun training. cheung spoke on his behalf and lee was accepted into the school. lee began training in wing chun with yip man. yip tried to keep his students from fighting in the street gangs of hong kong by encouraging them to fight in organised competitions.after a year into his wing chun training, most of yip mans other students refused to train with lee when they had learned of his mixed ancestry, as the chinese were generally against teaching their martial arts techniques to nonasians. lees sparring partner, hawkins cheung, states, probably fewer than six people in the whole wing chun clan were personally taught, or even partly taught, by yip man. however, lee showed a keen interest in wing chun and continued to train privately with yip man, william cheung, and wong shunleung.in , lee won the hong kong schools boxing tournament, knocking out the previous champion, gary elms, in the final. that year, lee was also a chacha dancer, winning hong kongs crown colony chacha championship.

until his late teens, lees street fights became more frequent and included beating the son of a feared triad family. in , after students from a rival choy li fut martial arts school challenged lees wing chun school, he engaged in a fight on a rooftop. in response to an unfair punch by another boy, bruce beat him so badly that he knocked out one of his teeth, leading to a complaint by the boys parents to the police.lees mother had to go to a police station and sign a document saying that she would take full responsibility for bruces actions if they released him into her custody. though she did not mention the incident to her husband, she suggested that bruce return to the united states to claim his u.s. citizenship at the age of . lees father agreed, as lees college prospects were not very promising if he remained in hong kong .

the police detective came and he says excuse me mr. lee, your son is really fighting bad in school. if he gets into just one more fight i might have to put him in jail.

in april , lees parents decided to send him to the united states to stay with his older sister, agnes lee , who was already living with family friends in san francisco. after several months, he moved to seattle in  to continue his high school education, where he also worked for ruby chow as a livein waiter at her restaurant. chows husband was a coworker and friend of lees father. lees elder brother peter lee  joined him in seattle for a short stay, before moving on to minnesota to attend college.in , lee started to teach martial arts. he called what he taught jun fan gung fu . it was his approach to wing chun. lee taught friends he met in seattle, starting with judo practitioner jesse glover, who continued to teach some of lees early techniques. taky kimura became lees first assistant instructor and continued to teach his art and philosophy after lees death. lee opened his first martial arts school, named the lee jun fan gung fu institute, in seattle.

lee completed his high school education and received his diploma from edison technical school on capitol hill in seattle.in march , lee enrolled at the university of washington and studied dramatic arts, philosophy, psychology, and various other subjects. despite what lee himself and many others have stated, lees official major was drama rather than philosophy, according to a  article in the universitys alumni publication.lee dropped out of university in early  and moved to oakland to live with james yimm lee. james lee was twenty years senior to bruce lee and a wellknown chinese martial artist in the area. together, they founded the second jun fan martial arts studio in oakland. james lee was responsible for introducing bruce lee to ed parker, an american martial artist. at the invitation of parker, lee appeared in the  long beach international karate championships and performed repetitions of twofinger pushups, using the thumb and the index finger of one hand, with feet at approximately shoulderwidth apart.in the same long beach event he also performed the one inch punch. lee stood upright, his right foot forward with knees bent slightly, in front of a standing, stationary partner. lees right arm was partly extended and his right fist approximately one inch  away from the partners chest. without retracting his right arm, lee then forcibly delivered the punch to volunteer bob baker while largely maintaining his posture. this sent baker backwards and falling into a chair placed behind baker to prevent injury, though bakers momentum caused him to fall to the floor. baker recalled, i told bruce not to do this type of demonstration again. when he punched me that last time, i had to stay home from work because the pain in my chest was unbearable. it was at the  championships that lee first met taekwondo master jhoon goo rhee. the two developed a friendshipa relationship from which they benefited as martial artists. rhee taught lee the side kick in detail, and lee taught rhee the nontelegraphic punch.in oaklands chinatown in , lee had a controversial private match with wong jackman, a direct student of ma kin fung, known for his mastery of xingyiquan, northern shaolin, and tai chi. according to lee, the chinese community issued an ultimatum to him to stop teaching nonchinese people. when he refused to comply, he was challenged to a combat match with wong. the arrangement was that if lee lost, he would have to shut down his school, while if he won, he would be free to teach white people, or anyone else.wong denied this, stating that he requested to fight lee after lee boasted during one of his demonstrations at a chinatown theatre that he could beat anyone in san francisco, and that wong himself did not discriminate against whites or other nonchinese people. lee commented, that paper had all the names of the sifu from chinatown, but they dont scare me. individuals known to have witnessed the match include cadwell, james lee , and william chen, a teacher of tai chi.

wong and william chen stated that the fight lasted an unusually long  minutes. wong claims that although he had originally expected a serious but polite bout, lee aggressively attacked him with intent to kill. when wong presented the traditional handshake, lee appeared to accept the greeting, but instead, lee allegedly thrust his hand as a spear aimed at wongs eyes. forced to defend his life, wong asserted that he refrained from striking lee with killing force when the opportunity presented itself because it could have earned him a prison sentence, but used illegal cufflings under his sleeves. according to michael dorgans  book bruce lees toughest fight, the fight ended due to lees unusually winded condition, as opposed to a decisive blow by either fighter.however, according to bruce lee, linda lee cadwell, and james yimm lee, the fight lasted a mere three minutes with a decisive victory for lee. in cadwells account, the fight ensued, it was a noholdsbarred fight, it took three minutes. bruce got this guy down to the ground and said do you give up and the man said he gave up. a couple of weeks after the bout, lee gave an interview claiming that he had defeated an unnamed challenger, which wong says was an obvious reference to him.in response, wong published his own account of the fight in the pacific weekly, a chineselanguage newspaper in san francisco, with an invitation to a public rematch if lee was not satisfied with the account. lee did not respond to the invitation despite his reputation for violently responding to every provocation. there were no further public announcements by either, though lee continued to teach white people. lee had abandoned thoughts of a film career in favour of pursuing martial arts. however, a martial arts exhibition on long beach in  eventually led to the invitation by television producer william dozier for an audition for a role in the pilot for number one son about lee chan, the son of charlie chan. the show never materialised, but dozier saw potential in lee.

from  to , lee played the role of kato alongside the title character played by van williams in the tv series produced and narrated by william dozier titled the green hornet, based on the radio show by the same name. the show ran for one season  from september  to march . lee and williams also appeared as their characters in three crossover episodes of batman, another william dozierproduced television series.the green hornet introduced the adult bruce lee to an american audience, and became the first popular american show presenting asianstyle martial arts. the shows director wanted lee to fight in the typical american style using fists and punches. as a professional martial artist, lee refused, insisting that he should fight in the style of his expertise. at first, lee moved so fast that his movements could not be caught on film, so he had to slow them down.during the shows production, lee became friends with gene lebell, who worked as a stuntman in the show. the two trained together and exchange martial arts knowledge from their respective specialties. after the show was cancelled in , lee wrote to dozier thanking him for starting my career in show business.in , lee played a role in one episode of ironside.

jeet kune do originated in . after filming one season of the green hornet, lee found himself out of work and opened the jun fan gung fu institute. the controversial match with wong jackman influenced lees philosophy about martial arts. lee concluded that the fight had lasted too long and that he had failed to live up to his potential using his wing chun techniques. he took the view that traditional martial arts techniques were too rigid and formalised to be practical in scenarios of chaotic street fighting. lee decided to develop a system with an emphasis on practicality, flexibility, speed, and efficiency. he started to use different methods of training such as weight training for strength, running for endurance, stretching for flexibility, and many others which he constantly adapted, including fencing and basic boxing techniques.lee emphasised what he called the style of no style. this consisted of getting rid of the formalised approach which lee claimed was indicative of traditional styles. lee felt that even the system he now called jun fan gung fu was too restrictive, and it eventually evolved into a philosophy and martial art he would come to call jeet kune do or the way of the intercepting fist. it is a term he would later regret, because jeet kune do implied specific parameters that styles connote, whereas the idea of his martial art was to exist outside of parameters and limitations.at the time, two of lees martial arts students were hollywood script writer stirling silliphant and actor james coburn. in , the three worked on a script for a film titled the silent flute, and they went together on a location hunt to india. the project was not realised at the time, but the  film circle of iron, starring david carradine, was based on the same plot. in , producer paul maslansky was reported to have planned and received funding for a film based on the original script for the silent flute.in , lee made a brief appearance in the silliphantpenned film marlowe, where he played a hoodlum hired to intimidate private detective philip marlowe, played by james garner, who uses his martial arts abilities to commit acts of vandalisation to intimidate marlowe. the same year, he was credited as the karate advisor in the wrecking crew, the fourth instalment of the matt helm comedy spyfi film starring dean martin. also that year, lee acted in one episode of here come the brides and blondie.in , lee was responsible for producing the fight choreography of a walk in the spring rain, starring ingrid bergman and anthony quinn, again written by silliphant.

in , lee appeared in four episodes of the television series longstreet, written by silliphant. lee played li tsung, the martial arts instructor of the title character mike longstreet, played by james franciscus, and important aspects of his martial arts philosophy were written into the script. according to statements made by lee, and also by linda lee cadwell after lees death, in  lee pitched a television series of his own, tentatively titled the warrior, discussions of which were confirmed by warner bros. during a december , , television interview on the pierre berton show, lee stated that both paramount and warner brothers wanted him to be in a modernized type of a thing, and that they think the western idea is out, whereas i want to do the western.according to cadwell, lees concept was retooled and renamed kung fu, but warner bros. gave lee no credit. warner brothers states that they had for some time been developing an identical concept, created by two writers and producers, ed spielman and howard friedlander in , as stated too by lees biographer matthew polly. according to these sources, the reason lee was not cast was because he had a thick accent, but fred weintraub attributes that to his ethnicity.the role of the shaolin monk in the wild west was eventually awarded to thennonmartialartist david carradine. in an interview with the pierre berton show, lee stated he understood warner brothers attitudes towards casting in the series they think that businesswise it is a risk. i dont blame them. if the situation were reversed, and an american star were to come to hong kong, and i was the man with the money, i would have my own concerns as to whether the acceptance would be there.producer fred weintraub had advised lee to return to hong kong and make a feature film which he could showcase to executives in hollywood. not happy with his supporting roles in the us, lee returned to hong kong. unaware that the green hornet had been played to success in hong kong and was unofficially referred to as the kato show, he was surprised to be recognised as the star of the show. after negotiating with both shaw brothers studio and golden harvest, lee signed a film contract to star in two films produced by golden harvest.

lee played his first leading role in the big boss , which proved to be an enormous box office success across asia and catapulted him to stardom. he followed up with fist of fury , which broke the box office records set previously by the big boss. having finished his initial twoyear contract, lee negotiated a new deal with golden harvest. lee later formed his own company, concord production inc., with chow. for his third film, the way of the dragon , he was given complete control of the films production as the writer, director, star, and choreographer of the fight scenes. in , at a demonstration in long beach, california, lee met karate champion chuck norris. in the way of the dragon lee introduced norris to moviegoers as his opponent. their showdown has been characterised as one of the best fight scenes in martial arts and film history. the role had originally been offered to american karate champion joe lewis. fist of fury and way of the dragon grossed an estimated us million and us million worldwide, respectively.from august to october , lee began work on his fourth golden harvest film, game of death. he began filming some scenes, including his fight sequence with  ft  in  american basketball star kareem abduljabbar, a former student. production stopped in november  when warner brothers offered lee the opportunity to star in enter the dragon, the first film to be produced jointly by concord, golden harvest, and warner bros. filming began in hong kong in february  and was completed in april .one month into the filming, another production company, starseas motion pictures, promoted bruce lee as a leading actor in fist of unicorn, although he had merely agreed to choreograph the fight sequences in the film as a favour to his longtime friend unicorn chan. lee planned to sue the production company, but retained his friendship with chan. however, only a few months after the completion of enter the dragon, and six days before its july , , release, lee died.enter the dragon went on to become one of the years highestgrossing films and cemented lee as a martial arts legend. it was made for us, in , the equivalent to  million adjusted for inflation as of . enter the dragon is estimated to have grossed over  million worldwide, the equivalent of over  billion adjusted for inflation as of . the film sparked a brief fad in martial arts, epitomised in songs such as kung fu fighting and some tv shows.

robert clouse, the director of enter the dragon, together with golden harvest, revived lees unfinished film game of death. lee had shot over  minutes of footage, including outtakes, for game of death before shooting was stopped to allow him to work on enter the dragon. in addition to abduljabbar, george lazenby, hapkido master ji hanjae, and another of lees students, dan inosanto, appeared in the film, which culminated in lees character, hai tien, clad in the nowfamous yellow track suit taking on a series of different challengers on each floor as they make their way through a fivelevel pagoda.in a controversial move, robert clouse finished the film using a lookalike and archive footage of lee from his other films with a new storyline and cast, which was released in . however, the cobbledtogether film contained only fifteen minutes of actual footage of lee  while the rest had a lee lookalike, kim tai chung, and yuen biao as stunt double. the unused footage lee had filmed was recovered  years later and included in the documentary bruce lee a warriors journey.

apart from game of death, other future film projects were planned to feature lee at the time. in , after the success of the big boss and fist of fury, a third film was planned by raymond chow at golden harvest to be directed by lo wei, titled yellowfaced tiger. however, at the time, lee decided to direct and produce his own script for way of the dragon instead. although lee had formed a production company with raymond chow, a period film was also planned from septembernovember  with the competing shaw brothers studio, to be directed by either chor yuen or cheng kang, and written by yi kang and chang cheh, titled the seven sons of the jade dragon.in , perfect storm entertainment and bruce lees daughter, shannon lee, announced that the series the warrior would be produced and would air on the cinemax. filmmaker justin lin was chosen to direct the series. production began in october , in cape town, south africa. the first season will contain  episodes. in april , cinemax renewed the series for a second season.in march , it was announced that producer jason kothari had acquired the rights to the silent flute to become a miniseries, which would have john fusco as a screenwriter and executive producer.

lee had also worked on several scripts himself. a tape containing a recording of lee narrating the basic storyline to a film tentatively titled southern fist/northern leg exists, showing some similarities with the canned script for the silent flute . another script had the title green bamboo warrior, set in san francisco, planned to costar bolo yeung and to be produced by andrew vajna. photoshoot costume tests were organised for some of these planned film projects.

lees first introduction to martial arts was through his father, from whom he learned the fundamentals of wustyle tai chi. in his teens, lee became involved in hong kong gang conflicts, which led to frequent street fights. the largest influence on lees martial arts development was his study of wing chun. lee was  years old under the wing chun teacher yip man, between late  and , after losing to rival gang members.yips regular classes generally consisted of the forms practice, chi sao  drills, wooden dummy techniques, and free sparring. there was no set pattern to the classes. other chinese martial arts styles lee trained in were northern praying mantis, southern praying mantis, eagle claw, tan tui, law hon, mizongyi, wa kung, monkey, southern dragon, fujian white crane, choy li fut, hung gar, choy gar, fut gar, mok gar, yau kung moon, li gar, and lau gar.lee was trained in boxing, between  and , by brother edward, coach of the st. francis xaviers college boxing team. lee went on to win the hong kong schools boxing tournament in , while scoring knockdowns against the previous champion gary elms in the final. after moving to the united states, lee was heavily influenced by heavyweight boxing champion muhammad ali, whose footwork he studied and incorporated into his own style in the s.lee demonstrated his jeet kune do martial arts at the long beach international karate championships in  and , with the latter having higherquality video footage available. lee is seen demonstrating quick eye strikes before his opponent can block, and demonstrating the oneinch punch on several volunteers. he demonstrates chi sao drills while blindfolded against an opponent, probing for weaknesses in his opponent while scoring with punches and takedowns. lee then participates in a fullcontact sparring bout against an opponent, with both wearing leather headgear.lee is seen implementing his jeet kune do concept of economical motion, using aliinspired footwork to keep out of range while counterattacking with backfists and straight punches. he halts attacks with stophit side kicks, and quickly executes several sweeps and head kicks. the opponent repeatedly attempts to attack lee, but is never able to connect with a clean hit. he once manages to come close with a spin kick, but lee counters it. the footage was reviewed by black belt magazine in , concluding that the action is as fast and furious as anything in lees films.it was at the  championships that lee first met taekwondo master jhoon goo rhee. while rhee taught lee the side kick in detail, lee taught rhee the nontelegraphic punch. rhee learned what he calls the accupunch from lee and incorporated it into american taekwondo. the accupunch is a rapid fast punch that is very difficult to block, based on human reaction timethe idea is to finish the execution of the punch before the opponent can complete the braintowrist communication.lee commonly used the oblique kick, made popular much later in mixed martial arts. it is called the jeet tek, stop kick or intercepting kick, in jeet kune do.

lee favored crosstraining between different fighting styles, and had a particular interest in grappling. lee trained with several judo practitioners in seattle and california, among them fred sato, jesse glover, taky kimura, hayward nishioka and wally jay, as well as gene lebell. many of his first students were proficient in judo and other arts, and he learned as much as he taught. after befriending lebell on the set of the green hornet, lee offered to teach him striking arts in exchange for being taught grappling techniques. lebell had been taught catch wrestling by prestigious grapplers lou thesz and ed lewis, and notable techniques of both judo and catch wrestling can be seen in lees tao of jeet kune do. he also learned grappling moves from hapkido master ji hanjae.according to glover, lee only found judo ineffective at the action of getting hold of the opponent. in their first training together, glover showed lee an osoto gari, which lee considered not a bad technique, but he disliked that glover had needed to hold onto lee. while in seattle, lee developed antigrappling techniques against opponents trying to tackle him or take him to the ground. glover recalled lee definitely would not go to the ground if he had the opportunity to get you standing up. nonetheless, lee expressed to lebell a wish to integrate judo into his fighting style. he incorporated the osoto gari into jeet kune do, among other throws, armlocks and chokeholds from judo.although lee opined that grappling was of little use in action choreography because it was not visually distinctive, he showcased grappling moves in his own films, such as way of the dragon, where his character finishes his opponent chuck norris with a neck hold inspired by lebell, and enter the dragon, whose prologue features lee submitting his opponent sammo hung with an armbar. game of death also features lee and hanjae exchanging grappling moves, as well as lee using wrestling against the character played by kareem abduljabbar.lee was also influenced by the training routine of the great gama, an indian/pakistani pehlwani wrestling champion known for his grappling strength. lee incorporated gamas exercises into his own training routine.

another major influence on lee was hong kongs street fighting culture in the form of rooftop fights. in the midth century, soaring crime in hong kong, combined with limited hong kong police manpower, led to many young hongkongers learning martial arts for selfdefence. around the s, there were about  martial arts schools in hong kong, teaching their own distinctive styles of martial arts. in hong kongs street fighting culture, there emerged a rooftop fight scene in the s and s, where gangs from rival martial arts schools challenged each other to bareknuckle fights on hong kongs rooftops, in order to avoid crackdowns by british colonial authorities. lee frequently participated in these hong kong rooftop fights. he combined different techniques from different martial arts schools into his own hybrid martial arts style.when lee returned to hong kong in the early s, his reputation as the fastest fist in the east routinely led to locals challenging him to street fights. he sometimes accepted these challenges and engaged in street fights, which led to some criticism from the press portraying him as violent at the time.

at  cm  and weighing  kg , lee was renowned for his physical fitness and vigor, achieved by using a dedicated fitness regimen to become as strong as possible. after his match with wong jackman in , lee changed his approach toward martial arts training. lee felt that many martial artists of his time did not spend enough time on physical conditioning. lee included all elements of total fitnessmuscular strength, muscular endurance, cardiovascular endurance, and flexibility. he used traditional bodybuilding techniques to build some muscle mass, though not overdone, as that could decrease speed or flexibility. at the same time, with respect to balance, lee maintained that mental and spiritual preparation are fundamental to the success of physical training in martial arts skills. in tao of jeet kune do he wrote

training is one of the most neglected phases of athletics. too much time is given to the development of skill and too little to the development of the individual for participation. ... jkd, ultimately is not a matter of petty techniques but of highly developed spirituality and physique.

according to linda lee cadwell, soon after he moved to the united states, lee started to take nutrition seriously and developed an interest in health foods, highprotein drinks, and vitamin and mineral supplements. he later concluded that achieving a highperformance body was akin to maintaining the engine of a highperformance automobile. allegorically, as one could not keep a car running on lowoctane fuels, one could not sustain ones body with a steady diet of junk food, and with the wrong fuel, ones body would perform sluggishly or sloppily.lee avoided baked goods and refined flour, describing them as providing empty calories that did nothing for his body. he was known for being a fan of asian cuisine for its variety, and often ate meals with a combination of vegetables, rice, and fish. lee had a dislike for dairy products and as a result, used powdered milk in his diet.dan inosanto recalls lee practised meditation as the first action on his schedule.

while best known as a martial artist, lee studied drama and asian and western philosophy, starting while a student at the university of washington. he was wellread and had an extensive library dominated by martial arts subjects and philosophical texts. his own books on martial arts and fighting philosophy are known for their philosophical assertions, both inside and outside of martial arts circles. his eclectic philosophy often mirrored his fighting beliefs, though he was quick to say that his martial arts were solely a metaphor for such teachings.he believed that any knowledge ultimately led to selfknowledge. he said that his chosen method of selfexpression was martial arts. his influences include taoism, jiddu krishnamurti, and buddhism. lees philosophy was very much in opposition to the conservative worldview advocated by confucianism. john little states that lee was an atheist. when asked in  about his religious affiliation, he replied, none whatsoever. when asked if he believed in god, he said, to be perfectly frank, i really do not.

aside from martial arts and philosophy, which focus on the physical aspect and selfconsciousness for truths and principles, lee also wrote poetry that reflected his emotion and a stage in his life collectively. many forms of art remain concordant with the artist creating them. lees principle of selfexpression was applied to his poetry as well. his daughter shannon lee said, he did write poetry; he was really the consummate artist.his poetic works were originally handwritten on paper, then later on edited and published, with john little being the major author , for bruce lees works. linda lee cadwell  shared her husbands notes, poems, and experiences with followers. she mentioned lees poems are, by american standards, rather darkreflecting the deeper, less exposed recesses of the human psyche.most of bruce lees poems are categorised as antipoetry or fall into a paradox. the mood in his poems shows the side of the man that can be compared with other poets such as robert frost, one of many wellknown poets expressing himself with dark poetic works. the paradox taken from the yin and yang symbol in martial arts was also integrated into his poetry. his martial arts and philosophy contribute a great part to his poetry. the free verse form of lees poetry reflects his famous quote be formless ... shapeless, like water.

lees cantonese birth name was lee junfan . the name homophonically means return again, and was given to lee by his mother, who felt he would return to the united states once he came of age. because of his mothers superstitious nature, she had originally named him saifon , which is a feminine name meaning small phoenix. the english name bruce is thought to have been given by the hospital attending physician, dr. mary glover.lee had three other chinese names lee yuencham , a family/clan name; lee yuenkam , which he used as a student name while he was attending la salle college, and his chinese screen name lee siulung . lees given name junfan was originally written in chinese as ; however, the jun  chinese character was identical to part of his grandfathers name, lee junbiu . hence, the chinese character for jun in lees name was changed to the homonym  instead, to avoid naming taboo in chinese tradition.

lees father, lee hoichuen, was one of the leading cantonese opera and film actors at the time and was embarking on a yearlong opera tour with his family on the eve of the japanese invasion of hong kong. lee hoichuen had been touring the united states for many years and performing in numerous chinese communities there.

although many of his peers decided to stay in the us, lee hoichuen returned to hong kong after bruces birth. within months, hong kong was invaded and the lees lived for three years and eight months under japanese occupation. after the war ended, lee hoichuen resumed his acting career and became a more popular actor during hong kongs rebuilding years.

lees mother, grace ho, was from one of the wealthiest and most powerful clans in hong kong, the hotungs. she was the halfniece of sir robert hotung, the eurasian patriarch of the clan. as such, the young bruce lee grew up in an affluent and privileged environment. despite the advantage of his familys status, the neighbourhood in which lee grew up became overcrowded, dangerous, and full of gang rivalries due to an influx of refugees fleeing communist china for hong kong, at that time a british crown colony.grace ho is reported as either the adopted or biological daughter of ho komtong  and the halfniece of sir robert hotung, both notable hong kong businessmen and philanthropists. bruce was the fourth of five children phoebe lee , agnes lee , peter lee, and robert lee.

graces parentage remains unclear. linda lee, in her  biography the bruce lee story, suggests that grace had a german father and was a catholic. bruce thomas, in his influential  biography bruce lee fighting spirit, suggests that grace had a chinese mother and a german father. lees relative eric peter ho, in his  book tracing my childrens lineage, suggests that grace was born in shanghai to a eurasian woman named cheung kingsin. eric peter ho said that grace lee was the daughter of a mixed race shanghainese woman and her father was ho kom tong. grace lee said her mother was english and her father was chinese. fredda dudley balling said grace lee was threequarters chinese and onequarter british.in the  biography bruce lee a life, matthew polly identifies lees maternal grandfather as ho komtong, who had often been reported as his adoptive grandfather. ho komtongs father, charles maurice bosman, was a dutch jewish businessman from rotterdam. he moved to hong kong with the dutch east india company and served as the dutch consul to hong kong at one time. he had a chinese concubine named sze tai with whom he had six children, including ho kom tong. bosman subsequently abandoned his family and immigrated to california. ho kom tong became a wealthy businessman with a wife,  concubines, and a british mistress who gave birth to grace ho.his younger brother robert lee junfai is a musician and singer; his group the thunderbirds was famous in hong kong. a few singles were sung mostly or all in english. also released was lee singing a duet with irene ryder. lee junfai lived with lee in los angeles in the united states and stayed. after lees death, lee junfai released an album and the single by the same name dedicated to lee called the ballad of bruce lee.while studying at the university of washington he met his future wife linda emery, a fellow student studying to become a teacher. as relations between people of different races was still banned in many us states, they married in secret in august . lee had two children with linda brandon  and shannon lee . upons lee passing in , she continued to promote bruce lees martial art jeet kune do. she wrote the  book bruce lee the man only i knew, on which the  feature film dragon the bruce lee story was based. in , she wrote the book the bruce lee story. she retired in  from the family estate.

lee died when his son brandon was eight years old. while alive, lee taught brandon martial arts and would invite him to visit sets. this gave brandon the desire to act and went on to study the craft. as a young adult, brandon lee found some success acting in actionoriented pictures such as legacy of rage , showdown in little tokyo , and rapid fire . in , at the age of , brandon lee died after being accidentally shot by a prop gun on the set of the crow.

lee died when his daughter shannon was four. in her youth she studied jeet kune do under richard bustillo, one of her fathers students; however, her serious studies did not begin until the late s. to train for parts in action movies, she studied jeet kune do with ted wong.

lees brother robert with his friends taky kimura, dan inosanto, steve mcqueen, james coburn, and peter chin were his pallbearers. coburn was a martial arts student and a friend of lee. coburn worked with lee and stirling silliphant on developing the silent flute. upon lees early death, at his funeral coburn gave a eulogy. regarding mcqueen, lee made no secret that he wanted everything mcqueen had and would stop at nothing to get it. inosanto and kimura were friends and disciple of lee. inosanto who would go on to train lees son brandon. kimura continued to teach lees craft in seattle. according to lees wife, chin was a lifelong family friend and a student of lee.james yimm lee  was one of lees three personally certified rd rank instructors and cofounded the jun fan gung fu institute in oakland where he taught jun fan gung fu in lees absence. james was responsible for introducing lee to ed parker, the organiser of the long beach international karate championships, where lee was first introduced to the martial arts community. hollywood couple roman polanski and sharon tate studied martial arts with lee. polanski flew lee to switzerland to train him. tate studied with lee in preparation for her role in the wrecking crew. after tate was murdered by the manson family, polanski initially suspected lee.screenwriter stirling silliphant was a martial arts student and a friend of lee. silliphant worked with lee and james coburn on developing the silent flute. lee acted and provided his martial arts expertise in several projects penned by silliphant, the first in marlowe  where lee plays winslow wong a hoodlum well versed in martial arts. lee also did fight choreographies for the film a walk in the spring rain , and played li tsung, a jeet kune do instructor who teaches the main character in the television show longstreet . elements of his martial arts philosophy were included in the script for the latter.basketball player kareem abduljabbar studied martial arts and developed a friendship with lee.actor and karate champion chuck norris was a friend and training partner of lees. after lees death, norris said he kept in touch with lees family.judoka and professional wrestler gene lebell became a friend of lee on the set of the green hornet. they trained together and exchanged their knowledge of martial arts.

on may , , lee collapsed during an automated dialogue replacement session for enter the dragon at golden harvest film studio in hong kong. because he was having seizures and headaches, he was immediately rushed to hong kong baptist hospital, where doctors diagnosed cerebral edema. they were able to reduce the swelling through the administration of mannitol. the headache and cerebral edema that occurred in his first collapse were later repeated on the day of his death.on friday, july , , lee was in hong kong to have dinner with actor george lazenby, with whom he intended to make a film. according to lees wife linda, lee met producer raymond chow at  p.m. at home to discuss the making of the film game of death. they worked until  p.m. and then drove together to the home of lees colleague betty ting pei, a taiwanese actress. the three went over the script at tings home, and then chow left to attend a dinner meeting.later, lee complained of a headache, and ting gave him the painkiller equagesic, which contained both aspirin and the tranquiliser meprobamate. around  p.m., he went to lie down for a nap. when lee did not come for dinner, chow came to the apartment, but he was unable to wake lee up. a doctor was summoned, and spent ten minutes attempting to revive lee before sending him by ambulance to queen elizabeth hospital. lee was declared dead on arrival at the age of .there was no visible external injury; however, according to autopsy reports, lees brain had swollen considerably, from , to , grams . the autopsy found equagesic in his system. on october , , chow stated in an interview that lee died from an allergic reaction to the tranquiliser meprobamate, the main ingredient in equagesic, which chow described as an ingredient commonly used in painkillers. when the doctors announced lees death, it was officially ruled a death by misadventure.lees wife linda returned to her hometown of seattle, and had lees body buried in lake view cemetery in seattle. pallbearers at lees funeral on july , , included taky kimura, steve mcqueen, james coburn, dan inosanto, peter chin, and lees brother robert. around the time of lees death, numerous rumours appeared in the media. lees iconic status and untimely death fed many wild rumours and theories. these included murder involving the triads and a supposed curse on him and his family.donald teare, a forensic scientist, recommended by scotland yard, who had overseen over , autopsies, was assigned to the lee case. his conclusion was death by misadventure caused by cerebral edema due to a reaction to compounds present in the combination medication equagesic. although there was initial speculation that cannabis found in lees stomach may have contributed to his death, teare said it would be both irresponsible and irrational to say that cannabis might have triggered either the events of bruces collapse on may  or his death on july . dr. r. r. lycette, the clinical pathologist at queen elizabeth hospital, reported at the coroner hearing that the death could not have been caused by cannabis.in a  biography, author matthew polly consulted with medical experts and theorised that the cerebral edema that killed lee had been caused by overexertion and heat stroke; heat stroke was not considered at the time because it was then a poorly understood condition. furthermore, lee had his underarm sweat glands removed in late , in the apparent belief that underarm sweat was unphotogenic on film. polly further theorised that this caused lees body to overheat while practising in hot temperatures on may  and july , , resulting in heat stroke that in turn exacerbated the cerebral edema that led to his death.in an article in the december  issue of clinical kidney journal, a team of researchers examined the various theories regarding lees cause of death, and concluded that his fatal cerebal edema was brought on by hyponatremia, an insufficient concentration of sodium in the blood.  the authors noted that there were several risk factors which predisposed lee to hyponatremia, including excessive water intake, insufficient solute intake, alcohol consumption, and use or overuse of multiple drugs which impair the ability of the kidneys to excrete excess fluids.  lees symptoms prior to his death were also found to closely match known cases of fatal hyponatremia.

lee is considered by some commentators and martial artists to be the most influential martial artists of all time, and a pop culture icon of the th century, who bridged the gap between east and west. time named lee one of the  most important people of the th century.a number of biography books have been written about lee. a biography had sold more than  million copies by .

lee was largely responsible for launching the kung fu craze of the s. he initially introduced kung fu to the west with american television shows such as the green hornet and kung fu, before the kung fu craze began with the dominance of hong kong martial arts films in . lees success inspired a wave of western martial arts films and television shows throughout the ss , as well as the more general integration of asian martial arts into western action films and television shows during the ss.enter the dragon has been cited as one of the most influential action films of all time. sascha matuszak of vice said enter the dragon is referenced in all manner of media, the plot line and characters continue to influence storytellers today, and the impact was particularly felt in the revolutionizing way the film portrayed africanamericans, asians and traditional martial arts. kuanhsing chen and beng huat chua cited fight scenes in lees films such as enter the dragon as being influential for the way they pitched an elemental story of good against evil in such a spectaclesaturated way.a number of action filmmakers around the world have cited bruce lee as a formative influence on their careers, including hong kong action film directors such as jackie chan and john woo, and hollywood filmmakers such as quentin tarantino and brett ratner.

jeet kune do, a hybrid martial arts philosophy drawing from different combat disciplines that was founded by lee, is sometimes credited with paving the way for modern mixed martial arts . the concept of mixed martial arts was popularised in the west by bruce lee via his system of jeet kune do. lee believed that the best fighter is not a boxer, karate or judo man. the best fighter is someone who can adapt to any style, to be formless, to adopt an individuals own style and not following the system of styles.in , ultimate fighting championship  founder dana white called lee the father of mixed martial arts and stated if you look at the way bruce lee trained, the way he fought, and many of the things he wrote, he said the perfect style was no style. you take a little something from everything. you take the good things from every different discipline, use what works, and you throw the rest away.lee was largely responsible for many people taking up martial arts. these include numerous fighters in combat sports who were inspired by lee; boxing champion sugar ray leonard said he perfected his jab by watching lee, boxing champion manny pacquiao compared his fighting style to lee, and ufc champion conor mcgregor has compared himself to lee and said that he believes lee would have been a champion in the ufc if he were to compete in the present day.lee inspired the foundation of american fullcontact kickboxing tournaments by joe lewis and benny urquidez in the s. american taekwondo pioneer jhoon goo rhee learned from lee what he calls the accupunch, which he incorporated into american taekwondo. rhee later coached heavyweight boxing champion muhammad ali and taught him the accupunch, which ali used to knockout richard dunn in . according to heavyweight boxing champion mike tyson, everyone wanted to be bruce lee in the s.ufc poundforpound champion jon jones cited lee as inspiration, with jones known for frequently using the oblique kick to the knee, a technique that was popularised by lee. ufc champions uriah hall and anderson silva cited lee as an inspiration. numerous other ufc fighters have cited lee as their inspiration, with several referring to him as a godfather or grandfather of mma.

lee is credited with helping to change the way asians were presented in american films. he defied asian stereotypes, such as the emasculated asian male stereotype. in contrast to earlier stereotypes which depicted asian men as emasculated, childlike, coolies, or domestic servants, lee demonstrated that asian men could be tough, strong and sexy according to university of michigan lecturer hye seung chung. in turn, lees popularity inspired a new asian stereotype, the martial artist.in north america, his films initially played largely to black, asian and hispanic audiences. within black communities, lees popularity was second only to heavyweight boxer muhammad ali in the s. as lee broke through to the mainstream, he became a rare nonwhite movie star in a hollywood industry dominated by white actors at the time. according to rapper ll cool j, lees films were the first time many nonwhite american children such as himself had seen a nonwhite action hero on the big screen in the s.

numerous entertainment and sports figures around the world have cited lee as a major influence on their work, including martial arts actors such as jackie chan and donnie yen, actorbodybuilder arnold schwarzenegger, actorcomedians such as eddie murphy and eddie griffin, actresses such as olivia munn and dianne doan, musicians such as steve aoki and rohan marley, rappers such as ll cool j and wutang clan leader rza, bands such as gorillaz, comedians such as w. kamau bell and margaret cho, basketball players stephen curry and jamal murray, skaters tony hawk and christian hosoi, and american footballer kyler murray, among others.bruce lee influenced several comic book writers, notably marvel comics founder stan lee, who considered bruce lee to be a superhero without a costume. shortly after his death, lee inspired the marvel characters shangchi  and iron fist  as well as the comic book series the deadly hands of kung fu . according to stan lee, any character that is a martial artist since then owes their origin to bruce lee in some form.bruce lee was a formative influence on the development of breakdancing in the s. early breakdancing pioneers such as the rock steady crew drew inspiration from kung fu moves, as performed by lee, inspiring dance moves such as the windmill among other breaking moves.in india, lee films had an influence on hindi masala films. after the success of lee films such as enter the dragon in india, deewaar  and later hindi films incorporated fight scenes inspired by s hong kong martial arts films up until the s. according to indian film star aamir khan, when he was a child, almost every house had a poster of bruce lee in s bombay.in japan, the manga and anime franchises fist of the north star  and dragon ball  were inspired by lee films such as enter the dragon. in turn, fist of the north star and especially dragon ball are credited with setting the trends for popular shnen manga and anime from the s onwards. spike spiegel, the protagonist from the  anime cowboy bebop, is seen practising jeet kune do and quotes lee.bruce lee films such as game of death and enter the dragon were the foundation for video game genres such as beat em up action games and fighting games. the first beat em up game, kungfu master , was based on lees game of death. the street fighter video game franchise  was inspired by enter the dragon, with the gameplay centered around an international fighting tournament, and each character having a unique combination of ethnicity, nationality and fighting style; street fighter went on to set the template for all fighting games that followed. since then, nearly every major fighting game franchise has had a character based on bruce lee. in april , lee was named a featured character in the combat sports video game ea sports ufc, and is playable in multiple weight classes.in france, the yamakasi cited the martial arts philosophy of bruce lee as an influence on their development of the parkour discipline in the s, along with the acrobatics of jackie chan. the yamakasi considered lee to be the unofficial president of their group.the legend of bruce lee , a chinese television drama series based on the life of bruce lee, has been watched by over  million viewers in china, making it the mostwatched chinese television drama series of all time, as of .in november , it was announced that taiwanese filmmaker ang lee was directing a biopic on bruce lee. ang lees son mason lee was cast to star in the movie, while bruce lees daughter, shannon lee, is set to produce the film.

though bruce lee did not appear in commercials during his lifetime, his likeness and image has since appeared in hundreds of commercials around the world. nokia launched an internetbased campaign in  with staged documentarylooking footage of bruce lee playing pingpong with his nunchaku and also igniting matches as they are thrown toward him. the videos went viral on youtube, creating confusion as some people believed them to be authentic footage.

 golden horse awards best mandarin film

 fist of fury special jury award

 hong kong film award for lifetime achievement

 named by time as one of the  most influential people of the th century

 star of the century award

 the asian awards founders award

statue of bruce lee  unveiled june , , chinatown central plaza, los angeles, california

statue of bruce lee  . m  bronze statue of lee was unveiled on november , , on what would have been his th birthday.

statue of bruce lee  the day before the hong kong statue was dedicated, the city of mostar in bosnia and herzegovina unveiled its own . m  bronze statue; supporters of the statue cited lee as a unifying symbol against the ethnic divisions in the country, which had culminated in the  bosnian war.

a theme park dedicated to lee was built in junan, guangdong. mainland chinese only started watching bruce lee films in the s, when videos of classic movies like fist of fury became available.

on january , , it was announced that lees hong kong home  would be preserved and transformed into a tourist site by yu panglin. yu died in  and this plan did not materialise. in , yus grandson, pang chiping, said we will convert the mansion into a centre for chinese studies next year, which provides courses like mandarin and chinese music for children.

chinese gungfu the philosophical art of self defense   

tao of jeet kune do   

bruce lees fighting method   

tupac amaru shakur , also known by his stage names pac and makaveli, was an american rapper. he is widely considered one of the most influential and successful rappers of all time. shakur is among the bestselling music artists, having sold more than  million records worldwide. much of shakurs music has been noted for addressing contemporary social issues that plagued inner cities.

shakur was born in new york city to parents who were both political activists and black panther party members. raised by his mother, afeni shakur, he relocated to baltimore in  and to the san francisco bay area in . with the release of his debut album pacalypse now in , he became a central figure in west coast hip hop for his conscious rap lyrics. shakur achieved further critical and commercial success with his followup albums strictly  my n.i.g.g.a.z...  and me against the world . his diamond certified album all eyez on me , the first doublelength album in hiphop history, abandoned his introspective lyrics for volatile gangsta rap. in addition to his music career, shakur also found considerable success as an actor, with his starring roles in juice , poetic justice , above the rim , bullet , gridlockd , and gang related .

during the later part of his career, shakur was shot five times in the lobby of a new york recording studio and experienced legal troubles, including incarceration. shakur served eleven months in prison on sexual abuse charges, but was released pending an appeal of his conviction in . following his release, he signed to marion suge knights label death row records and became heavily involved in the growing east coastwest coast hip hop rivalry. on september , , shakur was shot four times by an unidentified assailant in a driveby shooting in las vegas; he died six days later. following his murder, shakurs friendturnedrival, the notorious b.i.g., was at first considered a suspect due to their public feud; he was also murdered in another driveby shooting six months later in march , while visiting los angeles.shakurs doublelength posthumous album greatest hits  is one of his two releasesand one of only nine hip hop albumsto have been certified diamond in the united states. five more albums have been released since shakurs death, including his critically acclaimed posthumous album the don killuminati the  day theory  under his stage name makaveli, all of which have been certified platinum in the united states. in , shakur was inducted into the hiphop hall of fame. in , he was inducted into the rock and roll hall of fame in his first year of eligibility. rolling stone ranked shakur among the  greatest artists of all time. in , he was awarded a posthumous star on the hollywood walk of fame.

shakur was born on june , , in east harlem, upper manhattan, new york city. while born lesane parish crooks, at age one he was renamed tupac amaru shakur. he was named after tpac amaru ii, the descendant of the last incan ruler, who was executed in peru in  after his failed revolt against spanish rule. shakurs mother afeni shakur explained, i wanted him to have the name of revolutionary, indigenous people in the world. i wanted him to know he was part of a world culture and not just from a neighborhood.shakur had an older stepbrother, mopreme komani shakur, and a halfsister, sekyiwa shakur, two years his junior.

shakurs parents, afeni shakurborn alice faye williams in north carolinaand his biological father, william billy garland, had been active black panther party members in new york in the late s and early s. a month before shakurs birth, his mother was tried in new york city as part of the panther  criminal trial. she was acquitted of over  charges.other family members who were involved in the black panthers black liberation army were convicted of serious crimes and imprisoned, including shakurs stepfather, mutulu shakur, who spent four years among the fbis ten most wanted fugitives. mutulu shakur was apprehended in  and subsequently convicted for a  robbery of a brinks armored truck, during which police officers and a guard were killed.shakurs godfather, elmer geronimo pratt, a highranking black panther, was convicted of murdering a school teacher during a  robbery. after spending  years in prison, his conviction was overturned due to the prosecutions having concealed evidence that proved his innocence.shakurs godmother, assata shakur, is a former member of the black liberation army, who was convicted of the firstdegree murder of a new jersey state trooper and is still wanted by the fbi.

in the s, shakurs mother found it difficult to find work and she struggled with drug addiction. in , his family moved from new york city to baltimore, maryland. he attended eighth grade at roland park middle school, then ninth grade at paul laurence dunbar high school. he transferred to the baltimore school for the arts in the tenth grade, where he studied acting, poetry, jazz, and ballet. he performed in shakespeares playsdepicting timeless themes, now seen in gang warfare, he would recalland as the mouse king role in the nutcracker ballet.at the baltimore school for the arts, shakur befriended actress jada pinkett, who became a subject of some of his poems. with his friend dana mouse smith as beatbox, he won competitions as reputedly the schools best rapper. also known for his humor, he could mix with all crowds. he listened to a diverse range of music that included kate bush, culture club, sinad oconnor, and u.upon connecting with the baltimore young communist league usa, shakur dated mary baldridge, who was the daughter of the director of the local chapter of the communist party usa. baldridge, who was white, was described as an attractive young woman who was raised to look past color.in , shakur moved to marin city, california, an impoverished community in the san francisco bay area. in nearby mill valley, he attended tamalpais high school, where he performed in several theater productions. shakur did not graduate from high school, but he later earned his ged.

shakur began recording under the stage name mc new york in . that year, he began attending the poetry classes of leila steinberg, and she soon became his manager. steinberg organized a concert for shakur and his rap group strictly dope. steinberg managed to get shakur signed by atron gregory, manager of the rap group digital underground. in , gregory placed him with the underground as a roadie and backup dancer.

in january  shakur debuted under the stage name pac on digital underground, under a new record label, interscope records, on the groups january  single same song. the song was featured on the soundtrack of the  film nothing but trouble, starring dan aykroyd, john candy, chevy chase, and demi moore. the song opened the groups january  ep titled this is an ep release, while shakur appeared in the music video.

at the request of steinberg, digital underground cofounder jimi chopmaster j dright worked with shakur, ray luv and dize, a dj, on their earliest studio recordings. dright recalls that shakur did not work well as part of a group, and added, this guy was on a mission. from day one. maybe he knew he wasnt going to be around seven years later.from  to , dright and digital underground produced shakurs earliest work with his crew at the time, strictly dope. the recordings were rediscovered in  and released as the lost tapes circa . afeni shakur sued to stop the sale of the recordings but the suit was settled in june  and rereleased as beginnings the lost tapes .shakurs early days with digital underground made him acquainted with randy stretch walker, who along with his brother, dubbed majesty, and a friend debuted with an ep as a rap group and production team, live squad, in queens, new york. stretch was featured on a track of the digital undergrounds  album sons of the p. becoming fast friends, shakur and stretch recorded and performed together often.

shakurs debut album, pacalypse nowalluding to the  film apocalypse nowarrived in november . some prominent rapperslike nas, eminem, game, and talib kwelicite it as an inspiration. aside from if my homie calls, the singles trapped and brendas got a baby poetically depict individual struggles under socioeconomic disadvantage.us vice president dan quayle said, theres no reason for a record like this to be released. it has no place in our society. tupac, finding himself misunderstood, explained, in part

i just wanted to rap about things that affected young black males. when i said that, i didnt know that i was gonna tie myself down to just take all the blunts and hits for all the young black males, to be the medias kicking post for young black males.

in any case, pacalypse now was certified gold, half a million copies sold. the album addresses urban black concerns said to remain relevant to the present day.

shakurs second album, strictly  my n.i.g.g.a.z..., was released in february . a critical and commercial success, it debuted at no.  on the pop albums chart, the billboard . an overall more hardcore album, it emphasizes tupacs sociopolitical views, and has a metallic production quality. the song last wordz features ice cube, cowriter of n.w.as fuck tha police, who in his own solo albums had newly gone militantly political, and gangsta rapper icet, who in june  had sparked controversy with his band body counts track cop killer.in its vinyl release, side a, tracks  to , is labeled the black side, while side b, tracks  to , is the dark side. the album carries the single i get around, a party anthem featuring digital undergrounds shock g and moneyb, which became shakurs breakthrough, reaching no.  on the pop singles chart, the billboard hot . and it carries the optimistic compassion of another hit, keep ya head up, an anthem for womens empowerment. the album was certified platinum, with a million copies sold. as of , among shakur albums, including posthumous and compilation albums, strictly  my n.i.g.g.a.z... was th in sales at about ,, copies.

in late , shakur formed the group thug life with tyrus big syke himes, diron macadoshis rivers, his stepbrother mopreme shakur, and walter rated r burns. usually, thug life performed live without tupac.thug life released its only album, thug life, volume i, on october , , which is certified gold. it carries the single pour out a little liquor, produced by johnny j jackson, who would also produce much of shakurs album all eyez on me. the track also appears on the  above the rim soundtrack. due to gangsta rap being under heavy criticism at the time, the albums original version was scrapped, and the album redone with mostly new tracks. still, along with stretch, tupac would perform the first planned single, out on bail, which was never released, at the  source awards.

in , while visiting los angeles, the notorious b.i.g. asked a local drug dealer to introduce him to shakur and they quickly became friends. the pair would socialize when shakur went to new york or b.i.g. to los angeles. during this period, at his own live shows, shakur would call b.i.g. onto stage to rap with him and stretch. together, they recorded the songs runnin from tha police and house of pain.

reportedly, b.i.g. asked shakur to manage him, whereupon shakur advised him that sean combs would make him a star. yet in the meantime, shakurs lifestyle was comparatively lavish to b.i.g. who had not yet established himself. shakur welcomed b.i.g. to join his side group thug life, but he would instead form his own side group, the junior m.a.f.i.a., with his brooklyn friends lil cease and lil kim. shakur had a falling out with b.i.g. after he was shot at quad studios in .

shakurs third album, me against the world, was released while he was incarcerated in march . it is now hailed as his magnum opus, and commonly ranks among the greatest, most influential rap albums. the album debuted at no.  on the billboard  and sold , copies in its first week, setting a then record for highest firstweek sales for a solo male rapper.the lead single, dear mama, was released in february  with old school as the bside. it is the albums most successful single, topping the hot rap singles chart, and peaking at no.  on the billboard hot . in july, it was certified platinum. it ranked no.  on the yearend charts. the second single, so many tears, was released in june , reaching no.  on the hot rap singles chart and no.  on hot . the final single, temptations, was released in august . it reached no.  on the hot , no.  on the hot rb/hiphop singles  tracks, and no.  on the hot rap singles. several celebrities showed their support for shakur by appearing in the music video for temptations.shakur won best rap album at the  soul train music awards. in , it ranked th among his total albums in sales, with about  million copies sold in the us.

while shakur was imprisoned in , his mother was about to lose her house. shakur had his wife keisha morris contact death row records founder suge knight in los angeles. reportedly, shakurs mother promptly received ,. after an august visit to clinton correctional facility in northern new york state, knight traveled southward to new york city to attend the nd annual source awards ceremony. meanwhile, an east coastwest coast hip hop rivalry was brewing between death row and bad boy records. in october , knight visited shakur in prison again and posted . million bond. shakur returned to los angeles and joined death row with the appeal of his december  conviction pending.shakurs fourth album, all eyez on me, arrived on february , . it was raps first double albummeeting two of the three albums due in shakurs contract with death rowand bore five singles. the album shows shakur rapping about the gangsta lifestyle, leaving behind his previous political messages. with standout production, the album has more party tracks and often a triumphant tone. music journalist kevin powell noted that shakur, once released from prison, became more aggressive, and seemed like a completely transformed person.as shakurs second album to hit no.  on both the top rb/hiphop albums chart and the pop albums chart, the billboard , it sold , copies in its first week and was it was certified  multiplatinum in april. the singles how do u want it and california love reached no.  on the billboard hot . death row released shakurs diss track hit em up as the nonalbum bside to how do u want it. in this venomous tirade, the proclaimed bad boy killer threatens violent payback on all things bad boy  b.i.g., sean combs, junior m.a.f.i.a., the company  and on any in the east coast rap scene, like rap duo mobb deep and rapper chino xl, who allegedly had commented against shakur about the dispute.all eyez on me won rb/soul or rap album of the year at the  soul train music awards. at the  american music awards, shakur won favorite rap/hiphop artist. the album was certified  multiplatinum in june , and  in july .

at the time of his death, a fifth and final solo album was already finished, the don killuminati the  day theory, under the stage name makaveli. it had been recorded in one week in august  and released that year. the lyrics were written and recorded in three days, and mixing took another four days. in , mtv.com ranked the  day theory at no.  among hip hops greatest albums ever, and by  a classic album. its singular poignance, through hurt and rage, contemplation and vendetta, resonate with many fans.according to george papa g pryce, death row records then director of public relations, the album was meant to be underground, and was not intended for release before the artist was murdered. it peaked at no.  on billboards top rb/hiphop albums chart and on the billboard , with the secondhighest debutweek sales total of any album that year. on june , , it was certified  multiplatinum.later posthumous albums are archival productions, these albums are

r u still down 

greatest hits 

still i rise 

until the end of time 

better dayz 

loyal to the game 

pacs life 

shakurs first film appearance was in the  film nothing but trouble, a cameo by the digital underground. in , he starred in juice, where he plays the fictional roland bishop, a militant and haunting individual. rolling stones peter travers calls him the films most magnetic figure.in , shakur starred alongside janet jackson in john singletons romance film, poetic justice. singleton later fired shakur from the  film higher learning because the studio would not finance the film following his arrest. for the lead role in the eventual  film baby boy, a role played by tyrese gibson, singleton originally had shakur in mind. ultimately, the set design includes a shakur mural in the protagonists bedroom, and the films score includes shakurs song hail mary.director allen hughes had cast shakur as sharif in the  film menace ii society, but replaced him once shakur assaulted him on set due to a discrepancy with the script. nonetheless, in , hughes appraises that shakur would have outshone the other actors because he was bigger than the movie.shakur played a gangster called birdie in the  film above the rim. by some accounts, that character had been modeled after former new york drug dealer jacques haitian jack agnant, who managed and promoted rappers. shakur was introduced to him at a queens nightclub. reportedly, b.i.g. advised shakur to avoid him, but shakur disregarded the warning. through haitian jack, shakur met james jimmy henchman rosemond, also a drug dealer who doubled as music manager.soon after shakurs death, three more films starring him were released, bullet , gridlockd , and gang related .

it was rumored that shakur was being considered by george lucas to portray jedi master mace windu in the star wars prequel films . according to former death row records chief engineer rick clifford, george lucas was eyeing tupac to star in his return to the star wars saga. clifford talked about how understandably excited tupac was for the role, pac found out that i worked for brian austin green, who was on , then he found out i worked on some movies, so we always talked about his film career and stuff. ... he was telling me that he was supposed to read for george lucas and them. they wanted him to be a jedi. im serious. samuel l. jackson got tupacs part. tupac said to me, old man, keep your fingers crossed. he said, ive got three movies coming up. one of them, ive got to read for george lucas.the phantom menace script had begun being written in  and the eventual film seeing release in . lucas had asked jackson to ask shakur to audition but due to shakurs untimely death the role ultimately went to samuel l. jackson. the two had worked on the film juice together. the characters bald appearance could have also been an homage to shakur.

in his  interview with vibe magazine, shakur listed jada pinkett, jasmine guy, treach and mickey rourke among the people who were looking out for him while he was in prison. shakur also mentioned that madonna was a supportive friend. madonna later revealed that they had dated in .shakur became close friends with jada pinkett while attending the baltimore school for the arts. shakur helped pinkett land her first movie role in the film menace ii society . in turn, pinkett secured shakur a guest starring role on the sitcom a different world in . she appeared in his music videos keep ya head up and temptations. she also came up with the concept for his california love music video and had intended to direct it, but she removed herself from the project. in , pinkett contributed , towards shakurs bail as he awaited an appeal on his sexual abuse conviction. pinkett later revealed that she turned down his marriage proposal while he was incarcerated at rikers island in . speaking about pinkett, shakur stated jada is my heart. she will be my friend for my whole life. well be old together. jada can ask me to do anything and she can have it. pinkett said shakur was one of my best friends. he was like a brother. it was beyond friendship for us. the type of relationship we had, you only get that once in a lifetime.after shakur was shot in , he recuperated at jasmine guys home. they had met during his guest appearance on the sitcom a different world in . guy appeared in his music video temptations and later wrote his mothers  biography, afeni shakur evolution of a revolutionary.shakur befriended treach when they were both roadies on public enemys tour in . he made a cameo in naughty by natures music video uptown anthem in . treach collaborated with shakur on his song  deadly venomz and appeared in his music video temptations. treach was also a speaker at a public memorial service for shakur in .shakur and mickey rourke formed a bond while filming the movie bullet in . rourke recalled that shakur was there for me during some very hard times.shakur had friendships with other celebrities, including mike tyson chuck d, jim carrey, and alanis morissette. in april , shakur said that he, morrissette, snoop dogg, and suge knight were planning to open a restaurant together.on april , , shakur married his then girlfriend keisha morris, a prelaw student. their marriage was annulled ten months later.in a  interview published in the source, shakur criticized record producer quincy jones for his interracial marriage to actress peggy lipton. their daughter rashida jones responded with an irate open letter. shakur later apologized to her sister kidada jones, who he began dating in . shakur and jones attended mens fashion week in milan and walked the runway together for a versace fashion show. jones was at their hotel in las vegas when shakur was shot.

in november , shakur and two other men were charged in new york with sodomizing a woman in shakurs hotel room. the woman, ayanna jackson, alleged that after she performed oral sex on shakur at the public dance floor of a manhattan nightclub, she went to his hotel room a later day, when shakur, record executive jacques haitian jack agnant, shakurs road manager charles fuller and an unidentified fourth man apprehended and forced her to perform nonconsensual oral sex on each of them.  shakur was also charged with illegal possession of a firearm as two guns were found in the hotel room. interviewed on the arsenio hall show, shakur said he was hurt that a woman would accuse me of taking something from her, as he had been raised in a female household and surrounded by women his whole life.on december , , shakur was acquitted of three counts of sodomy and the associated gun charges, but convicted of two counts of firstdegree sexual abuse for forcibly touching the womans buttocks in his hotel room. jurors have said the lack of evidence stymied a sodomy conviction. shakurs lawyer characterized the sentence as out of line with the groping conviction and the setting of bail at  million as inhumane. shakurs accuser later filed a civil suit against shakur seeking  million for punitive damages which was subsequently settled.after shakur had been convicted of sexual abuse, jacques agnants case was separated and closed via misdemeanor plea without incarceration. a. j. benza reported in new york daily news shakurs new disdain for agnant who shakur theorized had set him up with the case. shakur reportedly believed his accuser was connected to and had sexual relations with agnant and james henchman rosemond, who he considered to be behind the  quad studios shooting.shakur was unable to post the  million dollar bond to keep himself free until sentencing so he surrendered himself to authorities at the bellevue hospital prison ward in new york city on december , . at the time, he was still recovering from injuries he received on november , when he was shot five times and robbed at quad studios. in january , shakur was moved to the north infirmary command  on rikers island in the bronx. on february , , he was sentenced to  months to  / years in prison by a judge who decried an act of brutal violence against a helpless woman.in march , shakur was transferred to clinton correctional facility in dannemora. while imprisoned, he began reading again, which he had been unable to do as his career progressed due to his marijuana and alcohol habits. works such as the prince by italian philosopher niccol machiavelli and the art of war by chinese military strategist sun tzu sparked shakurs interest in philosophy, philosophy of war and military strategy. on april , , shakur married his girlfriend keisha morris; the marriage was later annulled. while in prison, shakur exchanged letters with celebrities such as jim carrey and tony danza among others. he was also visited by al sharpton, who helped shakur get released from solitary confinement.by october , pending judicial appeal, shakur was incarcerated in new york. on october , he bonded out of the maximum security dannemora clinton correctional facility in the process of appealing his conviction, once suge knight, ceo of death row records, arranged for posting of his . million bond.

on october , , shakur was arrested in atlanta for shooting two offduty police officers, brothers mark whitwell and scott whitwell. the atlanta police claimed the shooting occurred after the brothers were almost struck by a car carrying shakur while they were crossing the street with their wives. as they argued with the driver, shakurs car pulled up and he shot the whitwells in the buttocks and the abdomen. however, there are conflicting accounts that the whitwells were harassing a black motorist and uttered racial slurs. according to some witnesses, shakur and his entourage had fired in selfdefense as mark whitwell shot at them first.shakur was charged with two counts of aggravated assault. mark whitwell was charged with firing at shakurs car and later with making false statements to investigators. scott whitwell admitted to possessing a gun he had taken from a henry county police evidence room. prosecutors ultimately dropped all charges against both parties. mark whitwell resigned from the force seven months after the shooting. both brothers filed civil suits against shakur; mark whitwells suit was settled out of court, while scott whitwells  million lawsuit resulted in a default judgment entered against the rappers estate in .

on november , , while in new york recording verses for a mixtape of ron g, shakur was repeatedly distracted by his beeper. music manager james jimmy henchman rosemond, reportedly offered shakur , to stop by quad studios, in times square, that night to record a verse for his client little shawn. shakur was unsure, but agreed to the session as he needed the cash to offset legal costs. he arrived with stretch and one or two others. in the lobby, three men robbed and beat him at gunpoint; shakur resisted and was shot. shakur speculated that the shooting had been a setup.against doctors advice, shakur checked out of metropolitan hospital center a few hours after surgery and secretly went to the house of the actress jasmine guy to recuperate. the next day, shakur arrived at a manhattan courthouse bandaged in a wheelchair to receive the jurys verdict for his sexual abuse case. shakur spent the next few weeks being cared for by his mother and a private doctor at guys home. the fruit of islam and former members of the black panther party stood guard to protect him.

in a  interview with vibe, shakur accused sean combs, jimmy henchman, and the notorious b.i.g,  who were at quad studios at the time  among others, of setting up or being privy to the november  robbery and shooting. vibe alerted the names of the accused. the accusations were significant to the eastwest coast rivalry in hiphop; in , months after the robbery, combs and b.i.g. released the track who shot ya, which shakur took as a mockery of his shooting and thought they could be responsible, so he released a diss song, hit em up, in which he targeted b.i.g., combs, their record label, junior m.a.f.i.a., and at the end of hit em up, he mentions rivals mobb deep and chino xl.in march , chuck philips, in the los angeles times, reported on the  ambush and shooting. the newspaper later retracted the article since it relied partially on fbi documents later discovered forged, supplied by a man convicted of fraud. in june , convicted murderer dexter isaac, incarcerated in brooklyn, issued a confession that he had been one of the gunmen who had robbed and shot shakur at henchmans order. philips then named isaac as one of his own, retracted articles unnamed sources.

on october  , two oakland police department officers stopped shakur for jaywalking at a downtown intersection. according to shakur, officers alex boyovic and kevin rogers asked him for his id and pressed him about his name before choking him, throwing him to the ground and slamming his head on the concrete. shakur filed a  million lawsuit against the officers for police brutality. the case was settled for about ,. it was later revealed that this incident was the onset of shakurs autoimmune disease alopecia, which led him to shave his head bald.

on april , , charged with felonious assault, shakur allegedly threw a microphone and swung a baseball bat at rapper chauncey wynn, of the group m.a.d., at a concert at michigan state university. shakur claimed the bat was a part of his show, that he never swung it, and that there was no criminal intent. nonetheless, on september , , shakur pleaded guilty to a misdemeanor and was sentenced to  days in jail, twenty of them suspended on condition that he complete  hours of community service.slated to star as sharif in the  hughes brothers film menace ii society, shakur was replaced by actor vonte sweet after allegedly assaulting one of the films directors, allen hughes. in early , shakur served  days in jail after being found guilty of the assault. the prosecutions evidence included a yo mtv raps interview where shakur boasts that he had beat up the director of menace ii society.

in , shakur was arrested in los angeles, when he was stopped by police on suspicion of speeding. police found a semiautomatic pistol in the car, a felony offense because a prior conviction in  in los angeles for carrying a concealed firearm. on april , , shakur was sentenced to  days in jail for violating his release terms and failing to appear for a road cleanup job, but was allowed to remain free awaiting appeal. on june , his sentence was deferred via appeals pending in other cases.

on august , , in marin city, shakur performed outdoors at a festival. for about an hour after the performance, he signed autographs and posed for photos. a conflict broke out and shakur allegedly drew a legally carried colt mustang but dropped it on the ground. shakur claimed that someone with him then picked it up when it accidentally discharged.about  yards  away in a schoolyard, qaid walkerteal, a boy aged  on his bicycle, was fatally shot in the forehead. police matched the bullet to a .caliber pistol registered to shakur. his stepbrother maurice harding was arrested in suspicion of having fired the gun, but no charges were filed. lack of witnesses stymied prosecution. in , qaids mother filed a wrongful death suit against shakur, which was settled for about , to ,.

civil rights activist and fierce rap critic c. delores tucker sued shakurs estate in federal court, claiming that lyrics in how do u want it and wonda why they call u bitch inflicted emotional distress, were slanderous, and invaded her privacy.  the case was later dismissed.

on the night of september , , shakur was in las vegas, nevada, to celebrate his business partner tracy danielle robinsons birthday and attended the bruce seldon vs. mike tyson boxing match with suge knight at the mgm grand. afterward in the lobby one of knights associates spotted orlando baby lane anderson, a southside compton crip, and told shakur he had tried to rob them earlier that year. the hotels surveillance footage shows the ensuing assault on anderson. shakur soon stopped by his hotel room and then headed with knight to his death row nightclub, club , in a black bmw il sedan, part of a larger convoy.at about  pm on las vegas boulevard, bicyclemounted police stopped the car for its loud music and lack of license plates. the plates were found in the trunk and the car was released without a ticket. at about  pm at a stop light, a white, fourdoor, latemodel cadillac sedan pulled up to the passenger side and an occupant rapidly fired into the car. shakur was struck four times once in the arm, once in the thigh, and twice in the chest with one bullet entering his right lung. shards hit knights head. frank alexander, shakurs bodyguard, was not in the car at the time. he would say he had been tasked to drive the car of shakurs girlfriend, kidada jones.shakur was taken to the university medical center of southern nevada where he was heavily sedated and put on life support. in the intensivecare unit on the afternoon of september , , shakur died from internal bleeding. he was pronounced dead at  pm. the official causes of death are respiratory failure and cardiopulmonary arrest associated with multiple gunshot wounds. shakurs body was cremated the next day. members of the outlawz, recalling a line in his song black jesus,  smoked some of his bodys ashes after mixing them with marijuana.in , investigative journalist chuck philips, after a year of work, reported in the los angeles times that anderson, a southside compton crip, having been attacked by suge and shakurs entourage at the mgm hotel after the boxing match, had fired the fatal gunshots, but that las vegas police had interviewed him only once, briefly, before his death in an unrelated shooting. philipss  article also alleges the involvement of christopher notorious b.i.g. wallace and several within new york citys criminal underworld. both anderson and wallace denied involvement, while wallace offered a confirmed alibi. music journalist john leland, in the new york times, called the evidence inconclusive.in , via the freedom of information act, the fbi released documents related to its investigation which described an extortion scheme by the jewish defense league  that included making death threats against shakur and other rappers, but did not indicate a direct connection to his murder.on july , , the las vegas police department executed a search warrant in connection with shakurs murder.on september , , the ap reported that las vegas police had arrested a suspect, duane keffe d davis, in shakurs murder.  police had two months previously served a search warrant at his wifes home in the las vegas suburb of henderson. davis pleaded not guilty on november ,  in las vegas.

shakurs music and philosophical outlook were deeply influenced by a wide range of american, africanamerican, and global influences, including the black panther party, black nationalism, egalitarianism, and the concept of liberty. moreover, shakurs artistic sensibilities were enriched by his passion for theater and admiration for the works of william shakespeare. notably, he honed his theatrical skills as a student at the baltimore school for the arts, where he delved into the psychological complexities inherent in intergang warfare and intercultural conflicts, reflecting themes explored in shakespearean dramas.pacalypse now , showcased his socially conscious perspective. through powerful tracks like brendas got a baby, trapped, and part time mutha, shakur addressed social injustice, poverty, and police brutality. in doing so, he contributed to the ongoing success of rap groups such as boogie down productions, public enemy, xclan, and grandmaster flash and the furious five, while establishing himself as one of the pioneering socially conscious rappers from the west coast.continuing his focus on the social challenges faced by africanamerican people, shakurs second album featured songs like the streetz r deathrow and last wordz. simultaneously, he showcased his compassionate side with the empowering anthem keep ya head up, and his legendary intensity with the title track from the album strictly  my n.i.g.g.a.z... additionally, he paid homage to his former group digital underground by including them on the playful track i get around. throughout his career, shakurs subsequent albums reflected a growing assertiveness in his approach.shakurs body of work encompassed contrasting themes, including social inequality, injustice, compassion, playfulness, and hope. these elements continued to shape his artistry, exemplified by his explosive  album me against the world. the release of all eyez on me in  further solidified his reputation, with tracks like ambitionz az a ridah, i aint mad at cha, california love, life goes on, and picture me rollin being hailed as classics by critics. shakur described all eyez on me as a celebration of life, and the album achieved both critical acclaim and commercial success.

shakur is considered one of the most influential rappers of all time. with rolling stone listing him as one of greatest artists of all time. he is widely credited as an important figure in hip hop culture, and his prominence in pop culture in general has been noted. dotdash, formerly about.com, while ranking him fifth among the greatest rappers, nonetheless notes, tupac shakur is the most influential hiphop artist of all time. even in death, pac remains a transcendental rap figure. yet to some, he was a father figure who, said rapper yg, makes you want to be betterat every level. in , billboard ranked tupac at number  among the top  rappers of all time.

allmusics stephen thomas erlewine described shakur as the unlikely martyr of gangsta rap, with shakur paying the ultimate price of a criminal lifestyle. shakur was described as one of the top two american rappers in the s, along with snoop dogg. the online rap magazine allhiphop held a  roundtable at which new york rappers cormega, citing tour experience with new york rap duo mobb deep, commented that b.i.g. ran new york, but shakur ran america.  shakur emerged as a celebrated artist, earning recognition for his astonishingly prolific output and unwavering commitment to his craft.according to british writer rob marriott, he deemed the act of tying a bandana into rabbit ears as one of the most distinctive and instantly recognizable style choices in the world of hiphop. regarded as a sex symbol, his unique style helped shape the fashion landscape of the s and continues to influence artists and fashion enthusiasts to this day.in , writing rolling stone magazines entry on shakur at no.  among the  greatest artists, new york rapper  cent appraised

every rapper who grew up in the nineties owes something to tupac. he didnt sound like anyone who came before him.

according to music journalist chuck philips, shakur had helped elevate rap from a crude street fad to a complex art form, setting the stage for the current global hiphop phenomenon. philips writes, the slaying silenced one of modern musics most eloquent voicesa ghetto poet whose tales of urban alienation captivated young people of all races and backgrounds. via numerous fans perceiving him, despite his questionable conduct, as a martyr, the downsizing of martyrdom cheapens its use, michael eric dyson concedes. but dyson adds, some, or even most, of that criticism can be conceded without doing damage to tupacs martyrdom in the eyes of those disappointed by more traditional martyrs.in , bet explained that his confounding mixture of ladies man, thug, revolutionary and poet has forever altered our perception of what a rapper should look like, sound like and act like. in  cent, ja rule, lil wayne, newcomers like freddie gibbs and even his friendturnedrival b.i.g., its easy to see that pac is the most copied mc of all time. there are murals bearing his likeness in new york, brazil, sierra leone, bulgaria and countless other places; he even has statues in atlanta and germany. quite simply, no other rapper has captured the worlds attention the way tupac did and still does. more simply, his writings, published after his death, inspired rapper yg to return to school and get his ged. in , former california senator and current vicepresident kamala harris called shakur the best rapper alive, which she explained because west coast girls think pac lives on.

in , shakurs mother founded the shakur family foundation. later renamed the tupac amaru shakur foundation, or tasf, it launched with a stated mission to provide training and support for students who aspire to enhance their creative talents. the tasf sponsors essay contests, charity events, a performing arts day camp for teenagers, and undergraduate scholarships. in june , the tasf opened the tupac amaru shakur center for the arts, or tasca, in stone mountain, georgia.  it closed in .

in , the university of california, berkeley, offered a course led by a student titled history  poetry and history of tupac shakur. in april , harvard university cosponsored the symposium all eyez on me tupac shakur and the search for the modern folk hero. the papers presented cover his ranging influence from entertainment to sociology. calling him a thug nigga intellectual, an organic intellectual, english scholar mark anthony neal assessed his death as leaving a leadership void amongst hiphop artists, as this walking contradiction helps, neal explained, make being an intellectual accessible to ordinary people.tracing shakurs mythical status, murray forman discussed him as o.g., or ostensibly gone, with fans, using digital mediums, resurrecting tupac as an ethereal life force. music scholar emmett price, calling him a black folk hero, traced his persona to black american folklores tricksters, which, after abolition, evolved into the urban badman. yet in shakurs terrible sense of urgency, price identified instead a quest to unify mind, body, and spirit.

in , death row released on dvd, tupac live at the house of blues, his final recorded live performance, an event on july , . in august , tupac shakur legacy, an interactive biography by jamal joseph, arrived with previously unpublished family photographs, intimate stories, and over  detachable copies of his handwritten song lyrics, contracts, scripts, poetry, and other papers. in , the shakur album pacs life was released and, like the previous, was among the recording industrys most popular releases. in , his estate made about  million.on april , , at the coachella music festival, rappers snoop dogg and dr. dre joined a shakur hologram , and, as a partly virtual trio, performed the shakur songs hail mary and  of amerikaz most wanted. there were talks of a tour, but dre refused. meanwhile, the greatest hits album, released in , and which in  had left the pop albums chart, the billboard , returned to the chart and reached no. , while also other shakur albums and singles drew sales gains.

the documentary film tupac resurrection was released in november . it was nominated for best documentary at the  academy awards.in , the play holler if ya hear me, based on shakurs lyrics, played on broadway, but, among broadways worstselling musicals in recent years, ran only six weeks. in development since , a shakur biopic, all eyez on me, began filming in atlanta in december . it was released on june , , on shakurs th birthday, albeit to generally negative reviews.

in august , a docuseries directed by allen hughes, outlaw the saga of afeni and tupac shakur, was announced.

on march , , one of shakurs earliest pieces of writing, an unpublished booklet of haiku poetry, was auctioned by sothebys estimated at , to , and hammered down at , plus buyer premium. shakur was  years old when he wrote and illustrated the booklet for jamal joseph and three other black panther party members while they were incarcerated at leavenworth prison. even at his young age, shakurs writing dealt with themes such as black liberation, mass incarceration, race, and masculinity. the booklet features a selfportrait of shakur sleeping, pen in hand, dreaming of the black panthers being freed from prison, and signed with a heart and the phrase tupac shakur, future freedom fighter.

in , shakur was inducted into the hiphop hall of fame. in , shakur was among the honorees at the first hip hop honors.in , shakurs close friend and classmate jada pinkett smith donated  million to their high school alma mater, the baltimore school for the arts, and named the new theater in his honor. in , pinkett smith honored shakurs th birthday by releasing a never before seen poem she had received from him.in , drawing praise, the vatican added changes, a  posthumous track, to its online playlist. on june , , the library of congress added dear mama to the national recording registry, the third rap song.in , the grammy museum opened an exhibition dedicated to shakur.in his first year of eligibility, shakur was inducted into the rock and roll hall of fame on april , .in january , the exhibition tupac shakur wake me when im free opened at the canvas at l.a. live in los angeles.on may , , oakland city council voted to name the section of macarthur boulevard between grand avenue and van buren avenue tupac shakur way.on june , , shakur received a star on the hollywood walk of fame. his halfsister, sekyiwa set shakur, accepted the award in his honor.

 forbes magazine ranked shakur at th among topearning dead celebrities.

 mtvs viewers voted shakur the greatest mc.

 shakur was voted no. on vibes online poll of top  best of all time.

 mtv staff placed him second on its list of the greatest mcs of all time.

 the source magazine ranked him no.  among the top  lyricists.

 the rock and roll hall of fame placed all eyez on me at no.  and me against the world at no. .

 rolling stone magazine placed shakur at no.  among the  greatest artists.

 all eyez on me was ranked no.  on rolling stones list of the  greatest albums of all time.

 billboard ranked shakur at number  of the top  rappers.

studio albumspacalypse now 

strictly  my n.i.g.g.a.z... 

me against the world 

all eyez on me 

the don killuminati the  day theory  posthumous studio albumsr u still down  

until the end of time 

better dayz 

loyal to the game 

pacs life collaboration albumsthug life, volume i with thug life posthumous collaboration albumstill i rise with outlawz 

shakurs life has been explored in several documentaries, most notably the academy awardnominated tupac resurrection .

 tupac shakur thug immortal

 tupac shakur words never die 

 tupac shakur before i wake...

 welcome to deathrow

 tupac shakur thug angel

 biggie  tupac

 tha westside

 pac  ever

 tupac resurrection

 tupac vs.

 tupac the hip hop genius 

 so many years, so many tears

 murder rap inside the biggie and tupac murders

 who killed tupac

 who shot biggie  tupac

 unsolved murders of biggie and tupac

 the life  death of tupac shakur

 dear mama

jennifer joanna aniston  is an american actress, producer and businesswoman. she rose to international fame for her role as rachel green on the television sitcom friends from  to , for which she earned primetime emmy, golden globe, and screen actors guild awards. since her career progressed in the s, she has become one of the worlds highestpaid actresses.the daughter of actors john aniston and nancy dow, she began working as an actress at an early age with an uncredited role in the  film mac and me. her first major film role came in the  horror comedy leprechaun. she has since starred in a string of successful comedy films such as office space , bruce almighty , the breakup , marley  me , just go with it , horrible bosses , were the millers , dumplin , and murder mystery . aniston also starred in the acclaimed independent films the good girl , friends with money , and cake . she returned to television in , producing and starring in the apple tv drama series the morning show, for which she received a screen actors guild award.

aniston has been included in numerous magazines lists of the worlds most beautiful women. her net worth is estimated as  million, and her box office gross is over . billion worldwide. she is the recipient of a star on the hollywood walk of fame and is the cofounder of the production company echo films, established in . she has been married twice first to actor brad pitt, to whom she was married for five years, and later to actor justin theroux, whom she married in  and separated from in .

aniston was born on february , , in the sherman oaks neighborhood of los angeles to greekborn actor john aniston and actress nancy dow. one of her maternal greatgrandfathers, louis grieco, was from italy. her mothers other ancestry includes english, irish, scottish, and a small amount of greek. her fathers ancestry is from the greek island of crete. aniston has two halfbrothers john melick, her older maternal halfbrother; and alex aniston, her younger paternal halfbrother. her godfather was actor telly savalas, one of her fathers best friends.her family moved to new york city when she was a child. despite her fathers television career, she was discouraged from watching television, though she found ways around the prohibition. when she was six, she began attending a waldorf school. her parents divorced when she was nine.having discovered acting at age  at the waldorf school, aniston enrolled in manhattans fiorello h. laguardia high school of music  art and performing arts, where she joined the schools drama society, and where anthony abeson was her drama teacher. she performed in the sign in sidney brusteins window by lorraine hansberry and three sisters by anton chekhov.

aniston first worked in offbroadway productions such as for dear life and dancing on checkers grave, and supported herself with parttime jobs including work as a telemarketer, waitress and bike messenger. in  she had an uncredited minor role in the critically panned scifi adventure film mac and me. the next year she appeared on the howard stern show as a spokesmodel for nutrisystem, and moved back to los angeles.she obtained her first regular television role on molloy in , and appeared in ferris bueller, a television adaptation of the  film ferris buellers day off; both series were quickly canceled. she starred as a teenager going to summer camp in the madefortelevision film camp cucamonga , and as a spoiled daughter followed by a vengeful leprechaun in the horror film leprechaun . a  retrospective from entertainment weekly identified leprechaun as her worst role, and aniston herself has expressed embarrassment over it.aniston also appeared in the two failed television comedy series the edge and muddling through, and gueststarred in quantum leap, hermans head and burkes law.

depressed over her four unsuccessful television shows, aniston approached warren littlefield at a los angeles gas station asking for reassurance. as the head of nbc entertainment, he encouraged her to continue acting, and a few months later helped cast her in friends, a sitcom set to debut on nbcs  fall lineup. the producer wanted aniston to audition for the role of monica geller, but courteney cox was deemed more suitable, and aniston was cast as rachel green. she was also offered a spot as a featured player on saturday night live, but turned it down in favor of friends. she played rachel until the show ended in , when aniston took a year hiatus from television save for occasional guest roles.

the program was a massive hit and aniston, along with her costars, gained worldwide recognition. her character was especially popular. she received five primetime emmy award nominations , and won for lead actress. she was also nominated for two golden globe awards and won in  as best actress  television series musical or comedy. according to the guinness book of world records, aniston  became the highestpaid television actress of all time with her  millionperepisode paycheck during the final season of friends. her characters relationship with ross geller, portrayed by david schwimmer, was widely popular among audiences; they were frequently voted televisions favorite couple in polls and magazines.after a fouryear hiatus, aniston returned to film work in , when she performed in the ensemble cast of romantic comedy shes the one. her first starring film vehicle was picture perfect , where she played a struggling young advertising executive opposite kevin bacon and jay mohr. it received mixed reviews and was only a moderate commercial success; but anistons performance was more warmly received, with many critics suggesting that she had screen presence. in , she appeared as a woman who falls for a gay man  in the romantic comedy the object of my affection, and the next year she starred as a restaurant waitress in the cult film office space.

aniston appeared in the dramedy rock star  opposite mark wahlberg and dominic west. she starred in the independent dramedy the good girl  as an unglamorous cashier who cheats on her husband. the film was a commercial success in limited release, taking in over  million in north america. film critic roger ebert declared it her breakthrough after languishing in a series of overlooked movies that ranged from the entertaining office space to the disposable picture perfect, jennifer aniston has at last decisively broken with her friends image in an independent film of satiric fire and emotional turmoil. it will no longer be possible to consider her in the same way.

anistons biggest commercial success in film has been the comedy bruce almighty , where she played the girlfriend of a television field reporter  offered the chance to be god for one week. with a worldwide box office gross of  million, it was the fifthhighestgrossing feature film of the year. aniston next starred as the old classmate of a tightly wound newlywed in the romantic comedy along came polly  opposite ben stiller, which placed number one at the north american box office, earning . million in its opening weekend; it eventually made  million worldwide.

in , aniston appeared as an alluring woman having an affair with an advertising executive in the thriller derailed, and as an obituary and wedding announcement writer in the romantic comedy rumor has it. both films were moderate box office hits. aniston took on the role of a single, cashstrapped woman working as a maid in the independent drama friends with money , which received a limited release.her next film was the romantic comedy the breakup , alongside vince vaughn, in which she starred as one half of a couple having a complicated split when both refuse to move out of the pairs recently purchased home. it received mixed reviews but grossed approximately . million during its opening weekend and  million worldwide. the a.v. clubs keith phipps gave the film a negative review, stating, its like watching the we were on a break episode of friends stretched to feature length, and without the blessed relief of commercial breaks or the promise of seinfeld around the corner. cinemablend gave the film a positive review stating, in an era of formulaic romantic movies that bear no resemblance to reality, the breakup offers a refreshing flipside.in , aniston directed the short film room , set in a hospital emergency room and starring robin wright and kris kristofferson, as part of glamours reel moments film series. she noted that she was inspired to direct by actress gwyneth paltrow, who also directed a short film that year. in , aniston gueststarred in an episode of dirtplaying the rival of courteney coxs characterand in an episode of  rock, playing a woman who stalks jack donaghy. for the latter she received a primetime emmy award nomination as outstanding guest actress in a comedy series.

the  comedy drama marley  me, starring aniston and owen wilson as the owners of the titular dog, set a record for the largest christmas day box office sales ever with . million. it earned a total of . million over the fourday weekend and placed number one at the box office, a position it maintained for two weeks. the total worldwide gross was . million. her next film in wide release, the romantic comedy hes just not that into you , in which she starred opposite ben affleck, grossed . million globally and ranked number one at the united states box office for its opening weekend. while it received mixed reviews, aniston, along with affleck, ginnifer goodwin, and jennifer connelly, were praised by critics as standouts in the film.aniston appeared as the former wife of a bounty hunter  in the romantic comedy action film the bounty hunter . the film was panned by critics, with the hollywood reporter writing that the mishmash ends up as a thoroughly unfunny adult cartoon. nevertheless, it was a box office success, garnering over  million worldwide. a lukewarm box office reception greeted her next film, the romantic comedy the switch , in which she starred with jason bateman as a something single woman who decides to have a child using a sperm bank. the films opening weekend drew what the hollywood reporter dubbed a dispiriting . million. the film received generally mixed reviews, with review site metacritic showing  out of  critics delivering a positive verdict.in , aniston was also a guest star on the season two premiere of abcs sitcom cougar town, playing a psychiatrist. her announcement that she would appear on cougar town garnered excitement and was dubbed her return to television. the a.v. club wrote, her role is a funny bit, and it highlights just how much jennifer aniston is built to be a tv star. in , she starred opposite adam sandler as an office manager posing as the wife of a plastic surgeon in the romantic comedy just go with it, and played a sexually aggressive dentist in horrible bosses. just go with it and horrible bosses both made over  million in north america and  million worldwide.aniston appeared in the comedy wanderlust  with paul rudd, with whom she acted in the object of my affection and also friends, as a married couple who join a commune after losing their money and deciding modern life is not for them. the script for wanderlust, bought by universal pictures, was produced by judd apatow. wanderlust received positive reviews but was a box office failure, grossing only  million worldwide, against a production budget of  million. aniston starred as a struggling stripper who agrees to pose as a wife for a drug deal, with jason sudeikis, in were the millers . the film received mixed reviews from critics, but was a financial success, grossing  million against a budget of  million.

aniston played the role of a stoic socialite who becomes the target of an illplanned kidnapping plot in life of crime , a film adaptation of elmore leonards  novel the switch. the film was released in limited theaters, to positive reviews. catherine shoard of the guardian described her performance as endearingly comic and eric kohn of indiewire wrote that aniston tops any of her recent performances with a spirited turn that harkens back to her neurotic days on friends. she also reprised her role for horrible bosses  .in cake , aniston starred as an astringent woman named claire simmons who struggles with chronic pain. the film received mixed reviews; nonetheless, anistons performance was acclaimed, dubbed by some critics as oscarworthy. the toronto international film festival called her performance heartbreakingly good, gregory ellwood of hitfix stated, its really on most peoples radar for being a rare dramatic turn for jennifer aniston, and she doesnt disappoint. he further stated, aniston makes you believe in claires pain. she makes you believe this character is at her lowest point and only she can pull herself out of it. ... its a complete performance from beginning to end and she deserves the appropriate accolades for it. for her performance, aniston was nominated for the golden globe award for best actress in a motion picture  drama, sag award for outstanding performance by a female actor in a leading role, and critics choice movie award for best actress.

in , aniston starred as a reluctant therapist in the screwball comedy shes funny that way, which received mixed reviews and found a limited release in theaters, but her performance was once again noticed. wesley morris of grantland called her one of the great screen comedians. ... most of her scenes here are extraneous, but her vulgarity and tartness are so sharp that the movie needs them. ... this isnt just aniston having the best stuff. its her having the most fun with her talent. shes funny in every way.aniston starred as the recently divorced mother of two children in the romantic comedy mothers day , directed by garry marshall, and opposite julia roberts and kate hudson. the film was panned by critics and a moderate commercial success. in , she voiced a workaholic and overprotective mother in the animated film storks, alongside andy samberg and kelsey grammer, which was released to mostly positive reviews; it grossed over . million against a  million budget. her last  film role was that of a frigidly cold head honcho of a company in the comedy office christmas party, directed by will speck and josh gordon and opposite jason bateman and kate mckinnon. it grossed . million worldwide.in the yellow birds, a war drama directed by alexandre moors, aniston portrays the mother of a deceased soldier, alongside alden ehrenreich, tye sheridan, jack huston, and toni collette. while she said she does not normally gravitate toward being in war films, she made an exception because the film was written so beautifully and in such a way she had never experienced. the film, first presented at the  sundance film festival, received a vod release in june . the los angeles times wrote in its review toni collette and jennifer aniston as the soldiers quite different but equally concerned mothers, deliver uniformly naturalistic performances.in december , netflix released the musical comedy dumplin, with aniston as executive producer and starmarking her first project for a streaming service. that year, she began work on another netflix project, murder mystery, a comedy that reunited her with adam sandler, which premiered on june , . the two of them reunited for the sequel murder mystery , which premiered on march , .aniston made her return to television on november , , producing and starring alongside reese witherspoon in the apple tv drama the morning show. it was her first main television role since the conclusion of friends in . aniston won the screen actors guild award for outstanding performance by a female actor in a drama series for the first season, and received a nomination for the second season. its second season also earned her a nomination for the outstanding performance by an ensemble in a drama series alongside the shows cast. aniston has also been nominated for a primetime emmy award for outstanding lead actress in a drama series for the series first season, and received golden globe award nominations for best actress  television series drama and best television series  drama as its producer for the first two seasons.she reunited with her friends cast mates for an hbo max unscripted television special titled friends the reunion in may . the special earned her a nomination for the primetime emmy award for outstanding variety special  for her producing credit.

aniston is one of the worlds highestpaid actresses as of . she has been on the forbes top earning actresses list for  years, every year since and since then also on its celebrity  list , topping it in . according to forbes, in october , aniston was the bestselling celebrity face of the entertainment industry.the magazine estimated her net worth at  million in , and  million in . it listed her earnings as . million in .

aniston has been included in various magazine lists of the worlds most beautiful women. in , she became the first gq woman of the year. she has frequently appeared on people magazines annual list of most beautiful women, topping the ranking in  and . she also topped the magazines best dressed list in . she has been a regular on fhms  sexiest women in the world list since , most recently ranking at number  in . in , the daily telegraph reported the most soughtafter body parts of the rich and famous revealed by two hollywood plastic surgeons who carried out a survey among their patients to build up the picture of what the perfect woman would look like. under the category of the most soughtafter body shape, aniston was voted in the top three, alongside gisele bndchen and penlope cruz. in the same year, readers of mens health voted aniston as the sexiest woman of all time. mens health also included her on its  hottest sex symbols of all time list, explaining that her downtoearth persona makes her seem attainable, and anyone whos seen her in office space has to admit she makes even pieces of flair look good. she rarely plays the airhead, and she seldom overplays a role shes funny in a quiet, refreshingly human way. and her alltoohuman love life off screen inspires sympathy that not even a string of bland romantic comedies can diminish. other sex symbols drift toward onedimensionality, becoming flat icons in the process, but throughout her career aniston has remained sexy, funny, and unmistakably real. although aniston disliked the hairstyle she wore during her first two years on friends, the rachel became very popular.she received a motion picture star on the hollywood walk of fame on february , , located at  hollywood boulevard. she was ranked third on forbes list of the  most powerful actresses in hollywood in .in july , amidst media speculation over whether she was pregnant, aniston penned an essay for the huffington post condemning the objectification and scrutiny we put women through. she asserted we are complete with or without a mate, with or without a child. we get to decide for ourselves what is beautiful when it comes to our bodies. ... we dont need to be married or mothers to be complete. we get to determine our own happily ever after for ourselves. the piece was supported by many celebrities and widely covered in the media.after years of aversion to social media, aniston joined instagram on october , , causing the app to break  with the first picture of the planned friends cast reunion for hbo max . within five hours and sixteen minutes, she broke the guinness world record for fastest time to reach one million followers on the platform. the record was broken in september , by sir david attenborough, who achieved the same feat in  minutes.

aniston practices hatha yoga and budokan karate. in , she spoke of her transcendental meditation practice. the following year, she revealed she has dyslexia, which had affected her education and selfesteem, and that after being diagnosed in her twenties, her outlook toward life changed. she stated, i thought i wasnt smart. i just couldnt retain anything. now i had this great discovery. i felt like all of my childhood traumadies, tragedies, dramas were explained.aniston donated to barack obamas  presidential campaign and took part in a fundraiser for hillary clinton during her  presidential campaign. she endorsed joe biden in the  presidential election.aniston does not have any children. in july , she wrote an oped piece for the huffpost titled for the record, where she criticized the media for the focus on her body and speculation over potential pregnancies. she wrote, the objectification and scrutiny we put women through is absurd and disturbing. in november , she appeared on the cover of allure for their final print issue. in the accompanying interview, aniston said she had undergone ivf to try and have children when she was in her thirties and forties, but the attempts did not result in any pregnancies. she said, all the years and years and years of speculation... it was really hard. i was going through ivf, drinking chinese teas, you name it. i was throwing everything at it. in , she disclosed that adam sandlers family sends her flowers every year on mothers day.

aniston met brad pitt in , and their relationship was highly publicized. she married pitt, after two years of dating, on july , , in a lavish malibu wedding. for a few years, their marriage was considered the rare hollywood success. on january , , they announced their separation, and finalized their divorce on october . during their divorce proceedings, news media speculated that pitt had been unfaithful to aniston with his mr.  mrs. smith costar angelina jolie, with whom he began a relationship soon after the split. in the months following, the publics reaction towards the divorce was reported in the press, and team aniston and team jolie tshirts appeared throughout the country. aniston commented on the divorce in a january  interview with the hollywood reporter, stating, nobody did anything wrong... it was just like, sometimes things happen.in , amid reports that their divorce was due to anistons refusal to have children with pitt, aniston said, ive never in my life said i didnt want to have children. i did and i do and i will ... i would never give up that experience for a career. aniston said the divorce prompted her to reach out to her mother, nancy, from whom she had been estranged for nearly a decade. nancy had talked about her daughter on a television show and written from mother and daughter to friends a memoir . aniston said she had been devastated by the death of her longtime therapist, whom she credited for helping make her separation from pitt easier. she said she did not regret her relationship with pitt, describing it as very intense and a beautiful, complicated relationship.aniston began a relationship with actor, director, and screenwriter justin theroux in may . the following january, they purchased a home in the bel air neighborhood of los angeles for roughly  million. they became engaged on august ,  and were married on august , , at their estate. they separated at the end of .

aniston has appeared in commercials and music videos throughout her career. after starting on friends, aniston and her costar matthew perry shot a minute instructional video for the release of microsofts windows  operating system. the next year she appeared in commercials for loral hair products.under a contract with elizabeth arden, inc., aniston worked for over a year on her first perfume, which was released in july . original plans called for the perfume to be named lolavie by jennifer aniston, but to avoid confusion with a similarly named perfume, the name was changed to simply jennifer aniston. in , she launched her second perfume, named j, followed by near dusk , beachscape , luxe  chapter one , chapter two , silver  solstice bloom .since , she has worked in a publicity campaign for the drink smartwater; on march , , she released a youtube video for smartwater, jennifer aniston goes viral, which tripled online interest in the product within  hours of its release. in , aniston cofounded hair care brand living proof and also became its spokeswoman. she left when the company was sold to unilever in . in january , she became the new spokeswoman of aveeno skincare. she replaced daniella van graas as aveenos spokesmodel and became its new face. reportedly, aniston is paid eight figures for her endorsement. she became the new face of emirates airline in , which was reportedly a success. for pharmaceutical company shire, she appeared in a  campaign raising awareness about chronic dry eye.she appeared in the  tom petty and the heartbreakers music video for walls, and in , in melissa etheridges music video for i want to be in love. she also appeared in a heineken commercial.along with brad pitt and brad grey, ceo of paramount pictures, aniston founded the film production company plan b entertainment in , although she and grey withdrew in . in , she and producer kristin hahn formed echo films.

aniston has been a celebrity advocate for numerous charities and received attention for her own donations. she has appeared in television commercials for st. judes childrens research hospital, and hosted september s stand up to cancer show. in the it cant wait campaign to free burma, aniston directed and starred in a video. she is a supporter of friends of el faro, a nonprofit organization that helps raise money for casa hogar sion, an orphanage in tijuana, mexico.

on april , , aniston received glaads vanguard award for her contributions to increased visibility and understanding of the lgbt community.  in , she was named the entertainment industry foundation  ambassador for the saks fifth avenue key to the cure campaign, which raises funds for the eif womens cancer research fund. in , she supported the comic relief, inc. charity. other charities that aniston has publicly supported include clothes off our back, feeding america, eb medical research foundation, project a.l.s., omnipeace, and the rape, abuse  incest national network.aniston donated , to doctors without borders, haitian health care provider partners in health and americares, and also participated in the hope for haiti now telethon. she donated , to the red cross and another , to the ricky martin foundation in  to help victims of hurricanes harvey, irma and maria.after being honored by smartwater in  for her ongoing philanthropic work for st. judes, aniston spoke of the importance of philanthropy in her life to instyle magazine we live an extremely beautiful, fortunate life being able to do what we get to do for a living. and so its a way of being able to be in a position to do something for people who are less able. its something that makes my heart smile.

aniston received five primetime emmy award nominations, two golden globe award nominations, and nine sag award nominations for her role in friends. from these, she won one of each. she also garnered a primetime emmy award nomination for her guest appearance in  rock, while her performance in cake earned her nominations at the golden globe and sag awards. aniston additionally won a sag award and was nominated for a primetime emmy award and two golden globe awards for the first season of the morning show. its second season earned her two sag award and two golden globe award nominations. for producing friends the reunion, she received another primetime emmy award nomination.

according to review aggregator site rotten tomatoes and the boxoffice site box office mojo, anistons most critically acclaimed and commercially successful films are office space , the good girl , bruce almighty , friends with money , the breakup , marley  me , just go with it , horrible bosses , were the millers , and dumplin .

israel , officially the state of israel , is a country in west asia. it is bordered by lebanon to the north, by syria to the northeast, by jordan to the east, by the red sea to the south, by egypt to the southwest, by the mediterranean sea to the west, and by the palestinian territories   the west bank along the east and the gaza strip along the southwest. tel aviv is the financial, economic, and technological center of the country, while its seat of government is in its proclaimed capital of jerusalem, although israeli sovereignty over both  west and east jerusalem is unrecognized internationally.israel is located in the southern levant, a region known historically as canaan, the land of israel, palestine and the holy land. in antiquity, it was home to several israelite and jewish kingdoms, including israel and judah and hasmonean judea. over the ages, the region was ruled by imperial powers such as the assyrians, babylonians, persians, greeks, and romans. during roman rule, jews became a minority in palestine. the region later came under byzantine and arab rule. in the medieval period, it was part of the islamic caliphates, the crusader kingdom of jerusalem, and the ottoman empire. the late th century saw the rise of zionism, a movement advocating for the establishment of a jewish homeland, during which the jewish people began purchasing land in palestine. under the british mandate by the league of nations after world war i, jewish immigration to the region increased considerably, leading to tensions between jews and the arab majority population. the unapproved  partition plan triggered a civil war between these two peoples. the british terminated the mandate on  may , and israel declared independence on the same day.

on  may , the armies of five neighboring arab states began entering the area of the former mandatory palestine, starting the first arabisraeli war. an armistice in  left israel in control of more territory than the u.n. partition plan had called for; and no new independent arab state was created as the rest of the former mandate territory were held by egypt and jordan, respectively the gaza strip and the west bank. the conflict resulted in the expulsion or flight of over , palestinian arabs from israeli territory to neighboring countries, leaving fewer than , within the green line. the number of jews who emigrated, fled, or were expelled from the arab world to israel was around , during and immediately after the war, reaching approximately , over the subsequent two decades. the  sixday war resulted in the israeli occupation of the palestinian territories of the west bank and gaza strip, along with the egyptian sinai peninsula and the syrian golan heights. israel has since effectively annexed both east jerusalem and the golan heights, and has established settlements across the occupied territories, actions which were rejected as illegal under international law. since the  yom kippur war, israel has signed peace treaties with egypt, returning the sinai peninsula, and with jordan, and more recently normalized relations with several arab countries, though efforts to resolve the israelipalestinian conflict have not succeeded. israels practices, in the longest military occupation in modern history, have drawn international condemnation for violating the human rights of the palestinians.the country has a parliamentary system elected by means of proportional representation. the prime minister serves as head of government, and is elected by the knesset, israels unicameral legislature. israel is the most developed country in the middle east, and an oecd member. it has the highest standards of living in the middle east, and is one of the most advanced and technological countries, with a population of nearly  million people, as of . it has the worlds thlargest economy by nominal gdp and th by nominal gdp per capita.

under the british mandate , the whole region was known as palestine. upon independence in , the country formally adopted the name state of israel  after other proposed historical and religious names including land of israel , ever , zion, and judea, were considered but rejected, while the name israel was suggested by bengurion and passed by a vote of . in the early weeks of independence, the government chose the term israeli to denote a citizen of israel, with the formal announcement made by minister of foreign affairs moshe sharett.the names land of israel and children of israel have historically been used to refer to the biblical kingdom of israel and the entire jewish people respectively. the name israel  in these phrases refers to the patriarch jacob who, according to the hebrew bible, was given the name after he successfully wrestled with the angel of the lord. jacobs twelve sons became the ancestors of the israelites, also known as the twelve tribes of israel or children of israel. jacob and his sons had lived in canaan but were forced by famine to go into egypt for four generations, lasting  years, until moses, a greatgreatgrandson of jacob, led the israelites back into canaan during the exodus. the earliest known archaeological artefact to mention the word israel as a collective is the merneptah stele of ancient egypt .

early expansions of hominins out of africa into the prehistoric levant, where israel is located, dates back at least . million years ago based on traces found at ubeidiya in the jordan rift valley, while the skhul and qafzeh hominins, homo sapiens fossils dating back , years, are some of the earliest traces of anatomically modern humans outside of africa. the natufian culture emerged in the southern levant by the th millennium bce, followed by the ghassulian culture by around , bce.

the canaanites are archaeologically attested in the middle bronze age . during the late bronze age , large parts of canaan formed vassal states paying tribute to the new kingdom of egypt. as a result of the late bronze age collapse, canaan fell into chaos, and egyptian control over the region collapsed completely. there is evidence that urban centers such as hazor, beit shean, megiddo, ekron, ashdod, and ashkelon were damaged or destroyed.a people named israel appear for the first time in the merneptah stele, an ancient egyptian inscription which dates to about  bce. ancestors of the israelites are thought to have included ancient semiticspeaking peoples native to this area. according to the modern archaeological account, the israelites and their culture branched out of the canaanite peoples and their cultures through the development of a distinct monolatristicand later monotheisticreligion centered on yahweh. they spoke an archaic form of the hebrew language, known as biblical hebrew. around the same time, the philistines settled on the southern coastal plain.modern archaeology has largely discarded the historicity of the narrative in the torah concerning the patriarchs, the exodus and the tales of conquest described in the book of joshua, and instead views the narrative as constituting the israelites national myth. however, some elements of these traditions do appear to have historical roots.

there is debate about the earliest existence of the kingdoms of israel and judah and their extent and power. while it is unclear if there was ever a united kingdom of israel, historians and archaeologists agree that the northern kingdom of israel existed by ca.  bce and that the kingdom of judah existed by ca.  bce. the kingdom of israel was the more prosperous of the two kingdoms and soon developed into a regional power; during the days of the omride dynasty, it controlled samaria, galilee, the upper jordan valley, the sharon and large parts of the transjordan. samaria, the capital, was home to one of the largest iron age structures in the levant.the kingdom of israel was destroyed around  bce, when it was conquered by the neoassyrian empire. the kingdom of judah, with its capital in jerusalem, later became a client state of first the neoassyrian empire and then the neobabylonian empire. it is estimated that the regions population was around , in the iron age ii. in / bce, following a revolt in judah, king nebuchadnezzar ii besieged and destroyed jerusalem and solomons temple, dissolved the kingdom and exiled much of the judean elite to babylon, beginning the babylonian captivity. the defeat was also recorded in the babylonian chronicles. after capturing babylon in  bce, cyrus the great, founder of the persian achaemenid empire, issued a proclamation allowing the exiled judean population to return to judah. the returned jewish population was permitted to selfgovern and rebuild the temple.

the construction of the second temple was completed c. bce. the persians ruled the region as the province of yehud, which had a population of around , people in the th to th centuries bce.in  bce, alexander the great of macedon conquered the region as part of his campaign against the persian empire. after his death, the area was controlled by the ptolemaic and seleucid empires as a part of coelesyria. over the ensuing centuries, the hellenization of the region led to cultural tensions that came to a head during the reign of antiochus iv, giving rise to the maccabean revolt of  bce. the civil unrest weakened seleucid rule and in the late nd century the semiautonomous hasmonean kingdom of judea arose, eventually attaining full independence and expanding into neighboring regions.

the roman republic invaded the region in  bce, first taking control of syria, and then intervening in the hasmonean civil war. the struggle between proroman and proparthian factions in judea led to the installation of herod the great as a dynastic vassal of rome. in  ce, the area was fully annexed as the roman province of judaea, a period that heralded tensions with roman rule, and led to a series of jewishroman wars, resulting in widespread destruction. the first jewishroman war  resulted in the destruction of jerusalem and the second temple and a sizable portion of the population being killed or displaced.a second uprising known as the bar kokhba revolt took place during  ce. initial successes allowed the jews to form an independent state in judea, but the romans massed large forces and brutally crushed the rebellion, devastating and depopulating judeas countryside. jerusalem was rebuilt as a roman colony under the name of aelia capitolina, and the province of judea was renamed syria palaestina. jews were expelled from the districts surrounding jerusalem, and joined communities in the diaspora. nevertheless, there was a continuous small jewish presence and galilee became its religious center. jewish communities also continued to reside in the southern hebron hills and on the coastal plain.

with the transition of roman rule into that of the byzantine empire under emperor constantine, early christianity displaced the more tolerant roman paganism as an external influence. with the conversion of constantine in the th century, the situation for the jewish majority in palestine became more difficult. a series of laws were passed that discriminated against jews and judaism, and jews were persecuted by both the church and the authorities. many jews had emigrated to flourishing diaspora communities, while locally there was both christian immigration and local conversion. by the middle of the th century, there was a christian majority. towards the end of the th century, samaritan revolts erupted, continuing until the late th century and resulting in a large decrease in the samaritan population. after the sasanian conquest of jerusalem and the shortlived jewish revolt against heraclius in  ce, the byzantine empire reconsolidated control of the area in .in  ce, the rashidun caliphate conquered the levant. over the next six centuries, control of the region transferred between the umayyad, abbasid, fatimid caliphates, and subsequently the seljuks and ayyubid dynasties. the population of the area drastically decreased during the following several centuries, dropping from an estimated  million during roman and byzantine periods to about , by the early ottoman period. alongside this population decline, there was a steady process of arabization and islamization brought on by nonmuslim emigration, muslim immigration, and local conversion to islam. the end of the th century brought the crusades, papallysanctioned incursions of christian crusaders intent on wresting jerusalem and the holy land from muslim control and establishing crusader states. the ayyubids pushed back the crusaders before muslim rule was fully restored by the mamluk sultans of egypt in .

in , the region was conquered by the ottoman empire and proceeded to be ruled as a part of ottoman syria for the next four centuries. in , a druze revolt led to the destruction of safed and tiberias. in the late th century, local arab sheikh zahir alumar created a de facto independent emirate in the galilee. ottoman attempts to subdue the sheikh failed, but after zahirs death the ottomans regained control of the area. in  governor jazzar pasha successfully repelled an assault on acre by troops of napoleon, prompting the french to abandon the syrian campaign. in , a revolt by palestinian arab peasants broke out against egyptian conscription and taxation policies under muhammad ali. although the revolt was suppressed, muhammad alis army retreated and ottoman rule was restored with british support in . shortly after, the tanzimat reforms were implemented across the ottoman empire.

since the existence of the earliest jewish diaspora, many jews have aspired to return to zion and the land of israel, though the amount of effort that should be spent towards such an aim was a matter of dispute. although the jewish population shrank dramatically throughout the periods of roman, byzantine, crusader, and islamic rule, a jewish presence continued to survive in the region. the jewish population of palestine from the outset of ottoman rule to the beginning of the zionist movement, known as the old yishuv, comprised a minority of the predominantly muslim and christian population and fluctuated in size throughout the centuries. during the th century, jewish communities struck roots in the four holy citiesjerusalem, tiberias, hebron, and safedand in , rabbi yehuda hachasid led a group of , jews to jerusalem. in the second half of the th century, eastern european jews who were opponents of hasidism, known as the perushim, settled in palestine.

the first wave of modern jewish migration to ottomanruled palestine, known as the first aliyah, began in , as jews fled pogroms in eastern europe. although the zionist movement already existed in practice, austrohungarian journalist theodor herzl is credited with founding political zionism, a movement that sought to establish a jewish state in the land of israel, thus offering a solution to the socalled jewish question of the european states, in conformity with the goals and achievements of other national projects of the time. in , herzl published der judenstaat , offering his vision of a future jewish state; the following year he presided over the first zionist congress in basel, switzerland. the second aliyah  began after the kishinev pogrom; some , jews settled in palestine, although nearly half of them left eventually. both the first and second waves of migrants were mainly orthodox jews, although the second aliyah included socialist groups who established the kibbutz movement. though the immigrants of the second aliyah largely sought to create communal agricultural settlements, the period saw the establishment of tel aviv as the first planned jewish town in . this period also saw the emergence of jewish armed militias, the first being bargiora, a guard founded in . two years later, the larger hashomer organization was founded as its replacement.

in , during world war i, british foreign secretary arthur balfour sent the balfour declaration to lord rothschild, a leader of the british jewish community, that stated that britain intended for the creation of a jewish national home in palestine.in , the jewish legion, a group primarily of zionist volunteers, assisted in the british conquest of palestine. in , after the allies conquered the levant during world war i, the territory was divided between britain and france under the mandate system, and the britishadministered area which included modern day israel was named mandatory palestine. arab opposition to british rule and jewish immigration led to the  palestine riots and the formation of a jewish militia known as the haganah  as an outgrowth of hashomer, from which the irgun and lehi paramilitaries later split off. in , the league of nations granted britain the mandate for palestine under terms which included the balfour declaration with its promise to the jews, and with similar provisions regarding the arab palestinians. the population of the area at this time was predominantly arab and muslim, with jews accounting for about , and arab christians about . of the population.the third  and fourth aliyahs  brought an additional , jews to palestine. the rise of nazism and the increasing persecution of jews in s europe led to the fifth aliyah, with an influx of a quarter of a million jews. this was a major cause of the arab revolt of , which was launched as a reaction to continued jewish immigration and land purchases. the revolt, which also involved a significant amount of intercommunal fighting among the arabs, was suppressed by british security forces and zionist militias. several hundred british security personnel and jews were killed, while , arabs were killed , were wounded, and , were detained. an estimated ten percent of the adult male palestinian arab population was killed, wounded, imprisoned or exiled. the british introduced restrictions on jewish immigration to palestine with the white paper of . with countries around the world turning away jewish refugees fleeing the holocaust, a clandestine movement known as aliyah bet was organized to bring jews to palestine. by the end of world war ii, the jewish population of palestine had increased to  of the total population.after world war ii, the uk found itself facing a jewish guerrilla campaign over jewish immigration restrictions, as well as continued conflict with the arab community over limit levels. the haganah joined irgun and lehi in an armed struggle against british rule. at the same time, hundreds of thousands of jewish holocaust survivors and refugees sought a new life far from their destroyed communities in europe. the haganah attempted to bring these refugees to palestine in a programme called aliyah bet in which tens of thousands of jewish refugees attempted to enter palestine by ship. most of the ships were intercepted by the royal navy and the refugees rounded up and placed in detention camps in atlit and cyprus by the british.

on  july , irgun bombed the british administrative headquarters for palestine, which was housed in the southern wing of the king david hotel in jerusalem. a total of  people of various nationalities were killed and  were injured. the hotel was the site of the secretariat of the government of palestine and the headquarters of the british armed forces in mandatory palestine and transjordan. the attack initially had the approval of the haganah. it was conceived as a response to operation agatha  and was the deadliest directed at the british during the mandate era. the jewish insurgency continued throughout the rest of  and  despite concerted efforts by the british military and palestine police force to suppress it. british efforts to mediate a negotiated solution with jewish and arab representatives also failed as the jews were unwilling to accept any solution that did not involve a jewish state and suggested a partition of palestine into jewish and arab states, while the arabs were adamant that a jewish state in any part of palestine was unacceptable and that the only solution was a unified palestine under arab rule. in february , the british referred the palestine issue to the newly formed united nations. on  may , the general assembly of the united nations resolved that the united nations special committee on palestine be created to prepare for consideration at the next regular session of the assembly a report on the question of palestine. in the report of the committee dated  september  to the general assembly, the majority of the committee in chapter vi proposed a plan to replace the british mandate with an independent arab state, an independent jewish state, and the city of jerusalem ... the last to be under an international trusteeship system. meanwhile, the jewish insurgency continued and peaked in july , with a series of widespread guerrilla raids culminating in the sergeants affair, in which the irgun took two british sergeants hostage as attempted leverage against the planned execution of three irgun operatives. after the executions were carried out, the irgun killed the two british soldiers, hanged their bodies from trees, and left a booby trap at the scene which injured a british soldier. the incident caused widespread outrage in the uk.in september , the british cabinet decided that the mandate was no longer tenable and to evacuate palestine. according to colonial secretary arthur creech jones, four major factors led to the decision to evacuate palestine the inflexibility of jewish and arab negotiators who were unwilling to compromise on their core positions over the question of a jewish state in palestine, the economic pressure that stationing a large garrison in palestine to deal with the jewish insurgency, the possibility of a wider jewish rebellion, and the possibility of an arab rebellion put on a british economy already strained by world war ii, the deadly blow to british patience and pride caused by the hangings of the sergeants, and the mounting criticism the government faced in failing to find a new policy for palestine in place of the white paper of .on  november , the general assembly adopted resolution   recommending the adoption and implementation of the plan of partition with economic union. the plan attached to the resolution was essentially that proposed by the majority of the committee in the report of  september. the jewish agency, which was the recognized representative of the jewish community, accepted the plan, which assigned  of mandatory palestine to the jews. at the time, the jews were about a third of the population of palestine and owned around  of the land. arabs constituted the majority of palestines population and owned about  of the land, with the remainder held by the mandate authorities or foreign landowners. the arab league and arab higher committee of palestine rejected it, and indicated that they would reject any other plan of partition. on  december , the arab higher committee proclaimed a threeday strike, and riots broke out in jerusalem. the situation spiraled into a civil war; just two weeks after the un vote, colonial secretary arthur creech jones announced that the british mandate would end on  may , at which point the british would evacuate. as arab militias and gangs attacked jewish areas, they were faced mainly by the haganah, as well as the smaller irgun and lehi. in april , the haganah moved onto the offensive. during this period , palestinian arabs fled or were expelled, due to a number of factors.

on  may , the day before the expiration of the british mandate, david bengurion, the head of the jewish agency, declared the establishment of a jewish state in eretzisrael, to be known as the state of israel. the only reference in the text of the declaration to the borders of the new state is the use of the term eretzisrael . the following day, the armies of four arab countriesegypt, syria, transjordan and iraqentered into parts of what had been british mandatory palestine, launching the  arabisraeli war; contingents from yemen, morocco, saudi arabia and sudan joined the war. the apparent purpose of the invasion was to prevent the establishment of the jewish state at inception, and some arab leaders talked about driving the jews into the sea. according to benny morris, jews were worried that the invading arab armies held the intent to slaughter them. the arab league stated the invasion was to restore law and order and to prevent further bloodshed.after a year of fighting, a ceasefire was declared and temporary borders, known as the green line, were established. jordan annexed what became known as the west bank, including east jerusalem, and egypt occupied the gaza strip. the un estimated that more than , palestinians were expelled by or fled from advancing israeli forces during the conflictwhat would become known in arabic as the nakba . some , remained and became arab citizens of israel.israel was admitted as a member of the un by majority vote on  may . an israelijordanian attempt at negotiating a peace agreement broke down after the british government, fearful of the egyptian reaction to such a treaty, expressed their opposition to the jordanian government. in the early years of the state, the labor zionist movement led by prime minister david bengurion dominated israeli politics.immigration to israel during the late s and early s was aided by the israeli immigration department and the nongovernment sponsored mossad lealiyah bet  which organized illegal and clandestine immigration. both groups facilitated regular immigration logistics like arranging transportation, but the latter also engaged in clandestine operations in countries, particularly in the middle east and eastern europe, where the lives of jews were believed to be in danger and exit from those places was difficult. mossad lealiyah bet was disbanded in . the immigration was in accordance with the one million plan. the immigrants came for differing reasons some held zionist beliefs or came for the promise of a better life in israel, while others moved to escape persecution or were expelled.an influx of holocaust survivors and jews from arab and muslim countries to israel during the first three years increased the number of jews from , to ,,. by , the population of israel had risen to two million. between  and , approximately ,, jewish refugees relocated to israel. some new immigrants arrived as refugees with no possessions and were housed in temporary camps known as maabarot; by , over , people were living in these tent cities. jews of european background were often treated more favorably than jews from middle eastern and north african countrieshousing units reserved for the latter were often redesignated for the former, with the result that jews newly arrived from arab lands generally ended up staying in transit camps for longer. during this period, food, clothes and furniture had to be rationed in what became known as the austerity period. the need to solve the crisis led bengurion to sign a reparations agreement with west germany that triggered mass protests by jews angered at the idea that israel could accept monetary compensation for the holocaust.

during the s, israel was frequently attacked by palestinian fedayeen, nearly always against civilians, mainly from the egyptianoccupied gaza strip, leading to several israeli reprisal operations. in , the united kingdom and france aimed at regaining control of the suez canal, which the egyptians had nationalized. the continued blockade of the suez canal and straits of tiran to israeli shipping, together with the growing amount of fedayeen attacks against israels southern population, and recent arab grave and threatening statements, prompted israel to attack egypt. israel joined a secret alliance with the united kingdom and france and overran the sinai peninsula but was pressured to withdraw by the un in return for guarantees of israeli shipping rights in the red sea via the straits of tiran and the canal. the war, known as the suez crisis, resulted in significant reduction of israeli border infiltration.

in the early s, israel captured nazi war criminal adolf eichmann in argentina and brought him to israel for trial. the trial had a major impact on public awareness of the holocaust. eichmann remains the only person executed in israel by conviction in an israeli civilian court. during the spring and summer of  israel was engaged in a diplomatic standoff with the united states due to the israeli nuclear programme.since , arab countries, concerned over israeli plans to divert waters of the jordan river into the coastal plain, had been trying to divert the headwaters to deprive israel of water resources, provoking tensions between israel on the one hand, and syria and lebanon on the other. arab nationalists led by egyptian president gamal abdel nasser refused to recognize israel and called for its destruction. by , israeliarab relations had deteriorated to the point of actual battles taking place between israeli and arab forces.

in may , egypt massed its army near the border with israel, expelled un peacekeepers, stationed in the sinai peninsula since , and blocked israels access to the red sea. other arab states mobilized their forces. israel reiterated that these actions were a casus belli and, on  june, launched a preemptive strike against egypt. jordan, syria and iraq responded and attacked israel. in a sixday war, israel captured and occupied the west bank from jordan, the gaza strip and sinai peninsula from egypt, and the golan heights from syria. jerusalems boundaries were enlarged, incorporating east jerusalem, and the  green line became the administrative boundary between israel and the occupied territories.following the  war and the three nos resolution of the arab league, israel faced attacks from the egyptians in the sinai peninsula during the  war of attrition, and from palestinian groups targeting israelis in the occupied territories, in israel proper, and around the world. most important among the various palestinian and arab groups was the palestinian liberation organization , established in , which initially committed itself to armed struggle as the only way to liberate the homeland. in the late s and early s, palestinian groups launched a wave of attacks against israeli and jewish targets around the world, including a massacre of israeli athletes at the  summer olympics in munich. the israeli government responded with an assassination campaign against the organizers of the massacre, a bombing and a raid on the plo headquarters in lebanon.

on  october , as jews were observing yom kippur, the egyptian and syrian armies launched a surprise attack against israeli forces in the sinai peninsula and golan heights, that opened the yom kippur war. the war ended on  october with israel successfully repelling egyptian and syrian forces but having suffered over , soldiers killed in a war which collectively took , lives in about  days. an internal inquiry exonerated the government of responsibility for failures before and during the war, but public anger forced prime minister golda meir to resign. in july , an airliner was hijacked during its flight from israel to france by palestinian guerrillas and landed at entebbe international airport, uganda. israeli commandos carried out an operation in which  out of  israeli hostages were successfully rescued.

the  knesset elections marked a major turning point in israeli political history as menachem begins likud party took control from the labor party. later that year, egyptian president anwar el sadat made a trip to israel and spoke before the knesset in what was the first recognition of israel by an arab head of state. in the two years that followed, sadat and begin signed the camp david accords  and the egyptisrael peace treaty . in return, israel withdrew from the sinai peninsula and agreed to enter negotiations over an autonomy for palestinians in the west bank and the gaza strip.on  march , a plo guerilla raid from lebanon led to the coastal road massacre. israel responded by launching an invasion of southern lebanon to destroy the plo bases south of the litani river. most plo fighters withdrew, but israel was able to secure southern lebanon until a un force and the lebanese army could take over. the plo soon resumed its policy of attacks against israel. in the next few years, the plo infiltrated the south and kept up a sporadic shelling across the border. israel carried out numerous retaliatory attacks by air and on the ground.

meanwhile, begins government provided incentives for israelis to settle in the occupied west bank, increasing friction with the palestinians in that area. the basic law jerusalem, capital of israel, passed in , was believed by some to reaffirm israels  annexation of jerusalem by government decree, and reignited international controversy over the status of the city. no israeli legislation has defined the territory of israel and no act specifically included east jerusalem therein. in  israel effectively annexed the golan heights, although annexation was not recognized internationally. the international community largely rejected these moves, with the un security council declaring both the jerusalem law and the golan heights law null and void. israels population diversity expanded in the s and s. several waves of ethiopian jews immigrated to israel since the s, while between  and , immigration from the postsoviet states increased israels population by twelve percent.on  june , during the iraniraq war, the israeli air force destroyed iraqs sole nuclear reactor under construction just outside baghdad, in order to impede iraqs nuclear weapons programme. following a series of plo attacks in , israel invaded lebanon that year to destroy the bases from which the plo launched attacks and missiles into northern israel. in the first six days of fighting, the israelis destroyed the military forces of the plo in lebanon and decisively defeated the syrians. an israeli government inquirythe kahan commissionwould later hold begin and several israeli generals as indirectly responsible for the sabra and shatila massacre and hold defense minister ariel sharon as bearing personal responsibility for the massacre. sharon was forced to resign as defense minister. in , israel responded to a palestinian terrorist attack in cyprus by bombing the plo headquarters in tunisia. israel withdrew from most of lebanon in , but maintained a borderland buffer zone in southern lebanon until , from where israeli forces engaged in conflict with hezbollah. the first intifada, a palestinian uprising against israeli rule, broke out in , with waves of uncoordinated demonstrations and violence occurring in the occupied west bank and gaza. over the following six years, the intifada became more organized and included economic and cultural measures aimed at disrupting the israeli occupation. more than a thousand people were killed in the violence. during the  gulf war, the plo supported saddam hussein and iraqi scud missile attacks against israel. despite public outrage, israel heeded american calls to refrain from hitting back and did not participate in that war.

in , yitzhak rabin became prime minister following an election in which his party called for compromise with israels neighbours. the following year, shimon peres on behalf of israel, and mahmoud abbas for the plo, signed the oslo accords, which gave the palestinian national authority the right to govern parts of the west bank and the gaza strip. the plo also recognized israels right to exist and pledged an end to terrorism. in , the israeljordan peace treaty was signed, making jordan the second arab country to normalize relations with israel. arab public support for the accords was damaged by the continuation of israeli settlements and checkpoints, and the deterioration of economic conditions. israeli public support for the accords waned as israel was struck by palestinian suicide attacks. in november , yitzhak rabin was assassinated as he left a peace rally by yigal amir, a farright jew who opposed the accords.during benjamin netanyahus premiership at the end of the s, israel agreed to withdraw from hebron, though this was never ratified or implemented, and signed the wye river memorandum, giving greater control to the palestinian national authority. ehud barak, elected prime minister in , began the new millennium by withdrawing forces from southern lebanon and conducting negotiations with palestinian authority chairman yasser arafat and u.s. president bill clinton at the  camp david summit. during the summit, barak offered a plan for the establishment of a palestinian state. the proposed state included the entirety of the gaza strip and over  of the west bank with jerusalem as a shared capital. each side blamed the other for the failure of the talks.

in late , after a controversial visit by likud leader ariel sharon to the temple mount, the second intifada began. it would continue for the next four and a half years. suicide bombings were a recurrent feature of the intifada, causing israeli civilian life to become a battlefield. some commentators contend that the intifada was preplanned by arafat due to the collapse of peace talks. sharon became prime minister in a  special election. during his tenure, sharon carried out his plan to unilaterally withdraw from the gaza strip and also spearheaded the construction of the israeli west bank barrier, ending the intifada. between  and , , israelis, , palestinians and  foreign citizens had been killed.in , a hezbollah artillery assault on israels northern border communities and a crossborder abduction of two israeli soldiers precipitated the monthlong second lebanon war. in , the israeli air force destroyed a nuclear reactor in syria. in , israel entered another conflict as a ceasefire between hamas and israel collapsed. the  gaza war lasted three weeks and ended after israel announced a unilateral ceasefire. hamas announced its own ceasefire, with its own conditions of complete withdrawal and opening of border crossings. despite neither the rocket launchings nor israeli retaliatory strikes having completely stopped, the fragile ceasefire remained in order. in what israel described as a response to more than a hundred palestinian rocket attacks on southern israeli cities, israel began an operation in the gaza strip in , lasting eight days. israel started another operation in gaza following an escalation of rocket attacks by hamas in july . in may , another round of fighting took place in gaza and israel, lasting eleven days.by the s, the increasing regional cooperation between israel and arab league countries have been established, culminating in the signing of the abraham accords. the israeli security situation shifted from the traditional arabisraeli conflict towards the iranisrael proxy conflict and direct confrontation with iran during the syrian civil war. on  october , palestinian militant groups from gaza, led by hamas, launched a series of coordinated attacks on israel, leading to the start of the  israelhamas war. on that day, approximately  israelis, predominantly civilians, were killed in communities near the gaza strip border and during a music festival. over  hostages, including elders, women, and children as young as  months, were kidnapped and taken to the gaza strip.

israel is located in the levant area of the fertile crescent region. the country is at the eastern end of the mediterranean sea, bounded by lebanon to the north, syria to the northeast, jordan and the west bank to the east, and egypt and the gaza strip to the southwest. it lies between latitudes  and  n, and longitudes  and  e.

the sovereign territory of israel  is approximately , square kilometers  in area, of which two percent is water. however israel is so narrow  that the exclusive economic zone in the mediterranean is double the land area of the country. the total area under israeli law, including east jerusalem and the golan heights, is , square kilometers , and the total area under israeli control, including the militarycontrolled and partially palestiniangoverned territory of the west bank, is , square kilometers .despite its small size, israel is home to a variety of geographic features, from the negev desert in the south to the inland fertile jezreel valley, mountain ranges of the galilee, carmel and toward the golan in the north. the israeli coastal plain on the shores of the mediterranean is home to most of the nations population. east of the central highlands lies the jordan rift valley, which forms a small part of the ,kilometer  great rift valley. the jordan river runs along the jordan rift valley, from mount hermon through the hulah valley and the sea of galilee to the dead sea, the lowest point on the surface of the earth. further south is the arabah, ending with the gulf of eilat, part of the red sea. makhtesh, or erosion cirques are unique to the negev and the sinai peninsula, the largest being the makhtesh ramon at  km in length. a report on the environmental status of the mediterranean basin states that israel has the largest number of plant species per square meter of all the countries in the basin. israel contains four terrestrial ecoregions eastern mediterranean conifersclerophyllousbroadleaf forests, southern anatolian montane conifer and deciduous forests, arabian desert, and mesopotamian shrub desert. it had a  forest landscape integrity index mean score of ./, ranking it th globally out of  countries.

the jordan rift valley is the result of tectonic movements within the dead sea transform  fault system. the dsf forms the transform boundary between the african plate to the west and the arabian plate to the east. the golan heights and all of jordan are part of the arabian plate, while the galilee, west bank, coastal plain, and negev along with the sinai peninsula are on the african plate. this tectonic disposition leads to a relatively high seismic activity in the region. the entire jordan valley segment is thought to have ruptured repeatedly, for instance during the last two major earthquakes along this structure in  and . the deficit in slip that has built up since the  event is sufficient to cause an earthquake of mw..the most catastrophic known earthquakes occurred in  bce, , , and  ce, that is every ca.  years on average. destructive earthquakes leading to serious loss of life strike about every  years. while stringent construction regulations are currently in place and recently built structures are earthquakesafe, as of  the majority of the buildings in israel were older than these regulations and many public buildings as well as , residential buildings did not meet the new standards and were expected to collapse if exposed to a strong earthquake.

temperatures in israel vary widely, especially during the winter. coastal areas, such as those of tel aviv and haifa, have a typical mediterranean climate with cool, rainy winters and long, hot summers. the area of beersheba and the northern negev have a semiarid climate with hot summers, cool winters, and fewer rainy days than the mediterranean climate. the southern negev and the arava areas have a desert climate with very hot, dry summers, and mild winters with few days of rain. the highest temperature in the world outside africa and north america as of ,  c , was recorded in  in the tirat zvi kibbutz in the northern jordan river valley.at the other extreme, mountainous regions can be windy and cold, and areas at elevation of  metres  or more  will usually receive at least one snowfall each year. from may to september, rain in israel is rare. with scarce water resources, israel has developed various watersaving technologies, including drip irrigation. israelis also take advantage of the considerable sunlight available for solar energy, making israel the leading nation in solar energy use per capitapractically every house uses solar panels for water heating.

there are four different phytogeographic regions in israel, due to the countrys location between the temperate and tropical zones, bordering the mediterranean sea in the west and the desert in the east. for this reason, the flora and fauna of israel are extremely diverse. there are , known species of plants found in israel. of these, at least  species are introduced and nonnative. there are  israeli nature reserves.the israeli ministry of environmental protection has reported that climate change will have a decisive impact on all areas of life, including water, public health, agriculture, energy, biodiversity, coastal infrastructure, economics, nature, national security, and geostrategy, and will have the greatest effect on vulnerable populations such as the poor, the elderly, and the chronically ill.

as of  december , israels population was an estimated ,,. in , the civil government recorded . of the population as jews, . of the population as arabs, and . as others . over the last decade, large numbers of migrant workers from romania, thailand, china, africa, and south america have settled in israel. exact figures are unknown, as many of them are living in the country illegally, but estimates run from , to ,. by june , approximately , african migrants had entered israel. about  of israelis live in urban areas.  of palestinian israelis reside in  densely populated towns and villages concentrated in the galilee, triangle and negev regions, with the remaining  in mixed cities and neighbourhoods. data published by the oecd in  estimated the average life expectancy of israelis at . years, making it the thhighest in the world. israeli arab life expectancy lags behind by  to  years, still higher than almost every majority arab or muslim country in the world.

israel was established as a homeland for the jewish people and is often referred to as a jewish state. the countrys law of return grants all jews and those of jewish ancestry the right to israeli citizenship. retention of israels population since  is about even or greater, when compared to other countries with mass immigration. jewish emigration from israel , primarily to the united states and canada, is described by demographers as modest, but is often cited by israeli government ministries as a major threat to israels future.approximately  of israeli jews are born in israel,  are immigrants from europe and the americas, and  are immigrants from asia and africa. jews from europe and the former soviet union and their descendants born in israel, including ashkenazi jews, constitute approximately  of jewish israelis. jews who left or fled arab and muslim countries and their descendants, including both mizrahi and sephardi jews, form most of the rest of the jewish population. jewish intermarriage rates run at over  and recent studies suggest that the percentage of israelis descended from both sephardi and ashkenazi jews increases by . percent every year, with over  of school children now originating from both communities. around  of israelis , ethnically defined as others, are russian descendants of jewish origin or family who are not jewish according to rabbinical law, but were eligible for israeli citizenship under the law of return.the total number of israeli settlers beyond the green line is over , . in , , israelis lived in west bank settlements, including those that predated the establishment of the state of israel and which were reestablished after the sixday war, in cities such as hebron and gush etzion bloc. in addition to the west bank settlements, there were more than , jews living in east jerusalem, and , in the golan heights. approximately , israelis lived in settlements in the gaza strip, known as gush katif, until they were evacuated by the government as part of its  disengagement plan.israeli arabs  comprise . of the population or ,, people. in a  telephone poll,  of arab citizens of israel identified as arab in israel or arab citizen of israel,  identified as palestinian, . as palestinian in israel or palestinian citizen of israel, and . as arab;  of israeli arabs have a positive view of the state. according to sammy smooha, the identity of . of the arabs in   has an israeli component and .  has a palestinian component. however, when these two components were presented as competitors, . of the arabs in  chose exclusive or primary palestinian identity, compared with . who chose exclusive or primary israeli arab identity.

israel has four major metropolitan areas gush dan , jerusalem metropolitan area , haifa metropolitan area , and beersheba metropolitan area .israels largest municipality, in population and area, is jerusalem with , residents in an area of  square kilometres . israeli government statistics on jerusalem include the population and area of east jerusalem, which is widely recognized as part of the palestinian territories under israeli occupation. tel aviv and haifa rank as israels next most populous cities, with populations of , and ,, respectively.

the  city of bnei brak is the most densely populated city in israel and one of the  most densely populated cities in the world.israel has  cities with populations over ,. in all, there are  israeli localities granted municipalities  status by the ministry of the interior, four of which are in the west bank. two more cities are planned kasif, a planned city to be built in the negev, and harish, originally a small town that is being built into a large city since .

a this number includes east jerusalem and west bank areas, which had a total population of , inhabitants in . israeli sovereignty over east jerusalem is internationally unrecognized. 

israels sole official language is hebrew. until , arabic was also one of two official languages of the state of israel; in  it was downgraded to having a special status in the state with its use by state institutions to be set in law. hebrew is the primary language of the state and is spoken every day by the majority of the population. arabic is spoken by the arab minority, with hebrew taught in arab schools.

as a country of immigrants, many languages can be heard on the streets. due to mass immigration from the former soviet union and ethiopia , russian and amharic are widely spoken. more than one million russianspeaking immigrants arrived in israel from the postsoviet states between  and . french is spoken by around , israelis, mostly originating from france and north africa . english was an official language during the mandate period; it lost this status after the establishment of israel, but retains a role comparable to that of an official language, as may be seen in road signs and official documents. many israelis communicate reasonably well in english, as many television programmes are broadcast in english with subtitles and the language is taught from the early grades in elementary school. in addition, israeli universities offer courses in the english language on various subjects.

israel comprises a major part of the holy land, a region of significant importance to all abrahamic religions, including judaism, christianity, islam, samaritanism, the druze faith and the bah faith.

the religious affiliation of israeli jews varies widely a social survey from  made by pew research indicates that  selfidentify as hiloni ,  as masorti ,  as dati  and  as haredi . haredi jews are expected to represent more than  of israels jewish population by .muslims constitute israels largest religious minority, making up about . of the population. about  of the population is christian and . is druze. the christian population is composed primarily of arab christians and aramean christians, but also includes postsoviet immigrants, the foreign laborers of multinational origins, and followers of messianic judaism, considered by most christians and jews to be a form of christianity. members of many other religious groups, including buddhists and hindus, maintain a presence in israel, albeit in small numbers. out of more than one million immigrants from the former soviet union, about , are considered not jewish by the chief rabbinate of israel.

the city of jerusalem is of special importance to jews, muslims, and christians, as it is the home of sites that are pivotal to their religious beliefs, such as the old city that incorporates the western wall and the temple mount  and the church of the holy sepulchre. other locations of religious importance in israel are nazareth , tiberias and safed , the white mosque in ramla , and the church of saint george and mosque of alkhadr, lod . a number of other religious landmarks are located in the west bank, among them josephs tomb in nablus, the birthplace of jesus and rachels tomb in bethlehem, and the cave of the patriarchs in hebron. the administrative center of the bah faith and the shrine of the bb are located at the bah world centre in haifa; the leader of the faith is buried in acre. a few kilometres south of the bah world centre is mahmood mosque affiliated with the reformist ahmadiyya movement. kababir, haifas mixed neighbourhood of jews and ahmadi arabs is one of a few of its kind in the country, others being jaffa, acre, other haifa neighbourhoods, harish and upper nazareth.

education is highly valued in the israeli culture and was viewed as a fundamental block of ancient israelites. jewish communities in the levant were the first to introduce compulsory education for which the organized community, not less than the parents was responsible. many international business leaders such as microsoft founder bill gates have praised israel for its high quality of education in helping spur israels economic development and technological boom. in , the country ranked third among oecd members  for the percentage of  yearolds that have attained tertiary education with  compared with the oecd average of . in , the country ranked third in the world in the number of academic degrees per capita .israel has a school life expectancy of  years and a literacy rate of .. the state education law, passed in , established five types of schools state secular, state religious, ultra orthodox, communal settlement schools, and arab schools. the public secular is the largest school group, and is attended by the majority of jewish and nonarab pupils in israel. most arabs send their children to schools where arabic is the language of instruction. education is compulsory in israel for children between the ages of three and eighteen. schooling is divided into three tiers  primary school , middle school , and high school   culminating with bagrut matriculation exams. proficiency in core subjects such as mathematics, the hebrew language, hebrew and general literature, the english language, history, biblical scripture and civics is necessary to receive a bagrut certificate.israels jewish population maintains a relatively high level of educational attainment where just under half of all israeli jews  hold postsecondary degrees. this figure has remained stable in their already high levels of educational attainment over recent generations. israeli jews  have average of . years of schooling making them one of the most highly educated of all major religious groups in the world. in arab, christian and druze schools, the exam on biblical studies is replaced by an exam on muslim, christian or druze heritage. maariv described the christian arabs sectors as the most successful in education system, since christians fared the best in terms of education in comparison to any other religion in israel. israeli children from russianspeaking families have a higher bagrut pass rate at highschool level. amongst immigrant children born in the former soviet union, the bagrut pass rate is higher amongst those families from european fsu states at . and lower amongst those from central asian and caucasian fsu states. in , . of all israeli twelfth graders earned a matriculation certificate.

israel has a tradition of higher education where its quality university education has been largely responsible in spurring the nations modern economic development. israel has nine public universities that are subsidized by the state and  private colleges. the hebrew university of jerusalem, israels secondoldest university after the technion, houses the national library of israel, the worlds largest repository of judaica and hebraica. the technion and the hebrew university consistently ranked among worlds  top universities by the prestigious arwu academic ranking. other major universities in the country include the weizmann institute of science, tel aviv university, bengurion university of the negev, barilan university, the university of haifa and the open university of israel. ariel university, in the west bank, is the newest university institution, upgraded from college status, and the first in over thirty years.

israel has a parliamentary system, proportional representation and universal suffrage. a member of parliament supported by a parliamentary majority becomes the prime ministerusually this is the chair of the largest party. the prime minister is the head of government and head of the cabinet.israel is governed by a member parliament, known as the knesset. membership of the knesset is based on proportional representation of political parties, with a . electoral threshold, which in practice has resulted in coalition governments. residents of israeli settlements in the west bank are eligible to vote and after the  election,  of the  members of the knesset  were settlers. parliamentary elections are scheduled every four years, but unstable coalitions or a noconfidence vote by the knesset can dissolve a government earlier. the first arabled party was established in  and as of , arabled parties hold about  of the parliaments seats.the basic laws of israel function as an uncodified constitution. in its basic laws, israel defines itself as a jewish and democratic state, and as the nationstate of the jewish people. in , the knesset began to draft an official constitution based on these laws.the president of israel is head of state, with limited and largely ceremonial duties.israel has no official religion, but the definition of the state as jewish and democratic creates a strong connection with judaism, as well as a conflict between state law and religious law. interaction between the political parties keeps the balance between state and religion largely as it existed during the british mandate.on  july , the knesset passed a basic law that characterizes the state of israel as principally a nation state of the jewish people, and hebrew as its official language. the bill ascribes special status to the arabic language. the same bill gives jews a unique right to national selfdetermination, and views the developing of jewish settlement in the country as a national interest, empowering the government to take steps to encourage, advance and implement this interest.

israel has a threetier court system. at the lowest level are magistrate courts, situated in most cities across the country. above them are district courts, serving as both appellate courts and courts of first instance; they are situated in five of israels six districts. the third and highest tier is the supreme court, located in jerusalem; it serves a dual role as the highest court of appeals and the high court of justice. in the latter role, the supreme court rules as a court of first instance, allowing individuals, both citizens and noncitizens, to petition against the decisions of state authorities.israels legal system combines three legal traditions english common law, civil law, and jewish law. it is based on the principle of stare decisis  and is an adversarial system, where the parties in the suit bring evidence before the court. court cases are decided by professional judges with no role for juries. marriage and divorce are under the jurisdiction of the religious courts jewish, muslim, druze, and christian. the election of judges is carried out by a committee of two knesset members, three supreme court justices, two israeli bar members and two ministers . the committees members of the knesset are secretly elected by the knesset, and one of them is traditionally a member of the opposition; the committees supreme court justices are chosen by tradition from all supreme court justices by seniority; the israeli bar members are elected by the bar; and the second minister is appointed by the israeli cabinet. the current justice minister, and the committees chairman, is yariv levin. administration of israels courts  is carried by the administration of courts, situated in jerusalem. both general and labor courts are paperless courts the storage of court files, as well as court decisions, are conducted electronically. israels basic law human dignity and liberty seeks to defend human rights and liberties in israel. as a result of enclave law, large portions of israeli civil law are applied to israeli settlements and israeli residents in the occupied territories.

the state of israel is divided into six main administrative districts, known as mehozot   center, haifa, jerusalem, north, south, and tel aviv districts, as well as the judea and samaria area in the west bank. all of the judea and samaria area and parts of the jerusalem and northern districts are not recognized internationally as part of israel. districts are further divided into fifteen subdistricts known as nafot , which are themselves partitioned into fifty natural regions.

a  including , arabs and , jews in east jerusalem, as of .

b  israeli citizens only.

in , as a result of the sixday war, israel captured and occupied the west bank, including east jerusalem, the gaza strip and the golan heights. israel also captured the sinai peninsula, but returned it to egypt as part of the  egyptisrael peace treaty. between  and , israel occupied part of southern lebanon, in what was known as the security belt. since israels capture of these territories, israeli settlements and military installations have been built within each of them, except lebanon.

the golan heights and east jerusalem have been fully incorporated into israel under israeli law, but not under international law. israel has applied civilian law to both areas and granted their inhabitants permanent residency status and the ability to apply for citizenship. the un security council has declared the annexation of the golan heights and east jerusalem to be null and void and continues to view the territories as occupied. the status of east jerusalem in any future peace settlement has at times been a difficult issue in negotiations between israeli governments and representatives of the palestinians, as israel views it as its sovereign territory, as well as part of its capital.

the west bank excluding east jerusalem is known in israeli law as the judea and samaria area; the almost , israeli settlers residing in the area are considered part of israels population, have knesset representation, a large part of israels civil and criminal laws applied to them, and their output is considered part of israels economy. the land itself is not considered part of israel under israeli law, as israel has consciously refrained from annexing the territory, without ever relinquishing its legal claim to the land or defining a border with the area. there is no border between israelproper and the west bank for israeli vehicles. israeli political opposition to annexation is primarily due to the perceived demographic threat of incorporating the west banks palestinian population into israel. outside of the israeli settlements, the west bank remains under direct israeli military rule, and palestinians in the area cannot become israeli citizens. the international community maintains that israel does not have sovereignty in the west bank, and considers israels control of the area to be the longest military occupation in modern history. the west bank was occupied and annexed by jordan in , following the  armistice agreements. only britain recognized this annexation and jordan has since ceded its claim to the territory to the plo. the population are mainly palestinians, including refugees of the  arabisraeli war. from their occupation in  until , the palestinians living in these territories were under israeli military administration. since the israelplo letters of recognition, most of the palestinian population and cities have been under the internal jurisdiction of the palestinian authority, and only partial israeli military control, although israel has on several occasions redeployed its troops and reinstated full military administration during periods of unrest. in response to increasing attacks during the second intifada, the israeli government started to construct the israeli west bank barrier. when completed, approximately  of the barrier will be constructed on the green line or in israel with  inside the west bank.israels claim of universal suffrage has been questioned due to its blurred territorial boundaries and its simultaneous extension of voting rights to israeli settlers in the occupied territories and denial of voting rights to their palestinian neighbours. the claim has also been challenged due to the alleged ethnocratic nature of the state.

the gaza strip is considered to be a foreign territory under israeli law; however, since israel operates a land, air, and sea blockade of the gaza strip, together with egypt, the international community considers israel to be the occupying power. the gaza strip was occupied by egypt from  to  and then by israel after . in , as part of israels unilateral disengagement plan, israel removed all of its settlers and forces from the territory, however, it continues to maintain control of its airspace and waters. the international community, including numerous international humanitarian organizations and various bodies of the un, consider gaza to remain occupied. following the  battle of gaza, when hamas assumed power in the gaza strip, israel tightened its control of the gaza crossings along its border, as well as by sea and air, and prevented persons from entering and exiting the area except for isolated cases it deemed humanitarian. gaza has a border with egypt, and an agreement between israel, the european union, and the pa governed how border crossing would take place . the application of democracy to its palestinian citizens, and the selective application of israeli democracy in the israelicontrolled palestinian territories, has been criticized.

the international court of justice, principal judicial organ of the un, said, in its  advisory opinion on the legality of the construction of the israeli west bank barrier, that the lands captured by israel in the sixday war, including east jerusalem, are occupied territory, and further found that the construction of the wall within the occupied palestinian territory to violate international law. most negotiations relating to the territories have been on the basis of un security council resolution , which emphasizes the inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory by war, and calls on israel to withdraw from occupied territories in return for normalization of relations with arab states, a principle known as land for peace. israel has been criticized for engaging in systematic and widespread violations of human rights in the occupied territories, including the occupation itself, and war crimes against civilians. the allegations include violations of international humanitarian law by the un human rights council, the u.s. state department has called reports of abuses of significant human rights of palestinians credible both within israel and the occupied territories. amnesty international and other ngos have documented mass arbitrary arrests, torture, unlawful killings, systemic abuses and impunity in tandem with a denial of the right to palestinian selfdetermination. in response to such allegations, prime minister netanyahu has defended the countrys security forces for protecting the innocent from terrorists and expressed contempt for what he describes as a lack of concern about the human rights violations committed by criminal killers. some observers, such as israeli officials, scholars, united states ambassador to the un nikki haley and un secretarygenerals ban kimoon and kofi annan, also assert that the un is disproportionately concerned with israeli misconduct.the international community widely regards israeli settlements in the occupied territories illegal under international law. united nations security council resolution , passed on  december  in a  vote by members of the u.n. security council  with the united states abstaining. the resolution states that israels settlement activity constitutes a flagrant violation of international law, has no legal validity and demands that israel stop such activity and fulfill its obligations as an occupying power under the fourth geneva convention. a united nations special rapporteur concluded that settlement program was a war crime under the rome statute, and amnesty international found that the settlement program constitutes an illegal transfer of civilians into occupied territory as well as amounting to pillage, which is prohibited by both the hague conventions and the geneva conventions as well as being a war crime under the rome statute.

israels treatment of the palestinians within the occupied territories has drawn accusations that it is guilty of the crime of apartheid by israeli human rights groups yesh din and btselem, and other international organizations including amnesty international and human rights watch, with the criticism extending to its treatment of palestinians within israel as well. amnestys report was criticised by politicians and representatives from israel, the united states, the united kingdom, the european commission, australia, netherlands and germany, while it was welcomed by palestinians, representatives from other states, and organizations such as the arab league. a  survey of academic experts on the middle east found an increase from  to  of these scholars describing israel as a onestate reality akin to apartheid. in , michael lynk, a canadian law professor appointed by the u.n. human rights council said that the situation met the legal definition of apartheid. subsequent reports from his successor, francesca albanese and from  permanent united nations fact finding mission on the israel palestine conflict chair navi pillay echoed this opinion. the crime of apartheid is a crime against humanity under the rome statute and the international convention on the suppression and punishment of the crime of apartheid.

israel maintains diplomatic relations with  member states of the united nations, as well as with the holy see, kosovo, the cook islands and niue. it has  diplomatic missions around the world; countries with whom they have no diplomatic relations include most muslim countries. six out of twentytwo nations in the arab league have normalized relations with israel. egypt and jordan signed peace treaties in  and , respectively, but israel remains formally in a state of war with syria, a status that dates back uninterrupted to . it has been in a similarly formal state of war with lebanon since the end of the lebanese civil war in , with the israellebanon border remaining unagreed by treaty.

in late , israel normalized relations with four more arab countries the united arab emirates and bahrain in september , sudan in october, and morocco in december. despite the peace treaty between israel and egypt, israel is still widely considered an enemy country among egyptians. iran had diplomatic relations with israel under the pahlavi dynasty but withdrew its recognition of israel during the islamic revolution. israeli citizens may not visit syria, lebanon, iraq, saudi arabia, and yemen  without permission from the ministry of the interior. as a result of the  gaza war, mauritania, qatar, bolivia, and venezuela suspended political and economic ties with israel, though bolivia renewed ties in . china maintains good ties with both israel and the arab world.

the united states and the soviet union were the first two countries to recognize the state of israel, having declared recognition roughly simultaneously. diplomatic relations with the soviet union were broken in , following the sixday war, and renewed in october . the united states regards israel as its most reliable partner in the middle east, based on common democratic values, religious affinities, and security interests. the united states has provided  billion in military assistance and  billion in grants to israel since , under the foreign assistance act , more than any other country for that period until . most surveyed americans have also held consistently favorable views of israel. the united kingdom is seen as having a natural relationship with israel on account of the mandate for palestine. relations between the two countries were also made stronger by former prime minister tony blairs efforts for a two state resolution. by , germany had paid  billion euros in reparations to the israeli state and individual israeli holocaust survivors. israel is included in the european unions european neighbourhood policy , which aims at bringing the eu and its neighbours closer.although turkey and israel did not establish full diplomatic relations until , turkey has cooperated with the jewish state since its recognition of israel in . turkeys ties to other muslimmajority nations in the region have at times resulted in pressure from arab and muslim states to temper its relationship with israel. relations between turkey and israel took a downturn after the  gaza war and israels raid of the gaza flotilla. relations between greece and israel have improved since  due to the decline of israeliturkish relations. the two countries have a defense cooperation agreement and in , the israeli air force hosted greeces hellenic air force in a joint exercise at the uvda base. the joint cyprusisrael oil and gas explorations centered on the leviathan gas field are an important factor for greece, given its strong links with cyprus. cooperation in the worlds longest subsea electric power cable, the euroasia interconnector, has strengthened relations between cyprus and israel.azerbaijan is one of the few majority muslim countries to develop strategic and economic relations with israel. azerbaijan supplies the country with a substantial amount of its oil needs, and israel is a critical arms supplier for azerbaijan. kazakhstan also has an economic and strategic partnership with israel. india established full diplomatic ties with israel in  and has fostered a strong military, technological and cultural partnership with the country since then. a  survey done on behalf of the israel ministry of foreign affairs listed india as more proisrael than  other countries surveyed. india is the largest customer of the israeli military equipment and israel is the secondlargest military partner of india after russia. ethiopia is israels main ally in africa due to common political, religious and security interests. israel provides expertise to ethiopia on irrigation projects and thousands of ethiopian jews live in israel.

israel has a history of providing emergency foreign aid and humanitarian response teams to disasters across the world. in  israel began its foreign aid programme in burma. the programmes focus subsequently shifted to africa. israels humanitarian efforts officially began in , with the establishment of mashav, the israels agency for international development cooperation. in this early period, whilst israels aid represented only a small percentage of total aid to africa, its programme was effective in creating goodwill throughout the continent; however, following the  war relations soured. israels foreign aid programme subsequently shifted its focus to latin america. since the late s israels foreign aid has gradually decreased, although in recent years israel has tried to reestablish its aid to africa. there are additional israeli humanitarian and emergency response groups that work with the israel government, including israaid, a joint programme run by  israeli organizations and north american jewish groups, zaka, the fast israeli rescue and search team , israeli flying aid , save a childs heart  and latet. between  and , israel sent  delegations of idf search and rescue unit, the home front command, to  countries. currently israeli foreign aid ranks low among oecd nations, spending less than . of its gni on development assistance. the un has set a target of .. in  six nations reached the un target. the country ranked th in the  world giving index.

the israel defense forces  is the sole military wing of the israeli security forces and is headed by its chief of general staff, the ramatkal, subordinate to the cabinet. the idf consists of the army, air force and navy. it was founded during the  arabisraeli war by consolidating paramilitary organizationschiefly the haganahthat preceded the establishment of the state. the idf also draws upon the resources of the military intelligence directorate , which works with mossad and shabak. the israel defense forces have been involved in several major wars and border conflicts in its short history, making it one of the most battletrained armed forces in the world.most israelis are drafted into the military at the age of . men serve two years and eight months and women two years. following mandatory service, israeli men join the reserve forces and usually do up to several weeks of reserve duty every year until their forties. most women are exempt from reserve duty. arab citizens of israel  and those engaged in fulltime religious studies are exempt from military service, although the exemption of yeshiva students has been a source of contention in israeli society for many years. an alternative for those who receive exemptions on various grounds is sherut leumi, or national service, which involves a programme of service in hospitals, schools and other social welfare frameworks. a small minority of israeli arabs also volunteer to serve in the army. as a result of its conscription programme, the idf maintains approximately , active troops and an additional , reservists, giving israel one of the worlds highest percentage of citizens with military training.

the nations military relies heavily on hightech weapons systems designed and manufactured in israel as well as some foreign imports. the arrow missile is one of the worlds few operational antiballistic missile systems. the python airtoair missile series is often considered one of the most crucial weapons in its military history. israels spike missile is one of the most widely exported antitank guided missiles  in the world. israels iron dome antimissile air defense system gained worldwide acclaim after intercepting hundreds of qassam,  mm grad and fajr artillery rockets fire by palestinian militants from the gaza strip. since the yom kippur war, israel has developed a network of reconnaissance satellites. the success of the ofeq programme has made israel one of seven countries capable of launching such satellites.israel is widely believed to possess nuclear weapons and per a  report, chemical and biological weapons of mass destruction. israel has not signed the treaty on the nonproliferation of nuclear weapons and maintains a policy of deliberate ambiguity toward its nuclear capabilities. the israeli navys dolphin submarines are believed to be armed with nuclear popeye turbo missiles, offering secondstrike capability. since the gulf war in , when israel was attacked by iraqi scud missiles, all homes in israel are required to have a reinforced security room, merkhav mugan, impermeable to chemical and biological substances.since israels establishment, military expenditure constituted a significant portion of the countrys gross domestic product, with peak of . of gdp spent on defense in . in , israel ranked th in the world by total military expenditure, with . billion, and th by defense spending as a percentage of gdp, with .. since , the united states has been a particularly notable contributor of military aid to israel. under a memorandum of understanding signed in , the u.s. is expected to provide the country with . billion per year, or around  of israels defense budget, from  to . israel ranked th globally for arms exports in . the majority of israels arms exports are unreported for security reasons. israel is consistently rated low in the global peace index, ranking th out of  nations for peacefulness in .

israel is considered the most advanced country in western asia and the middle east in economic and industrial development. in , the imf estimated israels gdp at  billion dollars and israels gdp per capita at , , a figure comparable to other highly developed and rich countries. israel has the highest average wealth per adult in the middle east. the economist ranked israel as the th most successful economy among the developed countries for . it has the highest number of billionaires in the middle east, and the th highest number in the world. in recent years israel had one of the highest growth rate in the developed world along with ireland. israels quality university education and the establishment of a highly motivated and educated populace is largely responsible for spurring the countrys high technology boom and rapid economic development. in , it joined the oecd. the country is ranked th in the world economic forums global competitiveness report and th on the world banks ease of doing business index. israel was also ranked fifth in the world by share of people in highskilled employment. israeli economic data covers the economic territory of israel, including the golan heights, east jerusalem and israeli settlements in the west bank.despite limited natural resources, intensive development of the agricultural and industrial sectors over the past decades has made israel largely selfsufficient in food production, apart from grains and beef. imports to israel, totaling . billion in , include raw materials, military equipment, investment goods, rough diamonds, fuels, grain, and consumer goods. leading exports include machinery and equipment, software, cut diamonds, agricultural products, chemicals, and textiles and apparel; in , israeli exports reached  billion. the bank of israel holds  billion of foreignexchange reserves, the th highest in the world. since the s, israel has received military aid from the united states, as well as economic assistance in the form of loan guarantees, which now account for roughly half of israels external debt. israel has one of the lowest external debts in the developed world, and is a lender in terms of net external debt , which in  stood at a surplus of  billion.israel has the secondlargest number of startup companies in the world after the united states, and the thirdlargest number of nasdaqlisted companies after the u.s. and china. it is the world leader for number of startups per capita. israel has been dubbed the startup nation. intel and microsoft built their first overseas research and development facilities in israel, and other hightech multinational corporations, such as ibm, google, apple, hewlettpackard, cisco systems, facebook and motorola have opened research and development centres in the country. in , american investor warren buffetts holding company berkshire hathaway bought the israeli company iscar for  billion, its first acquisition outside the united states.the days which are allocated to working times in israel are sunday through thursday , or friday . in observance of shabbat, in places where friday is a work day and the majority of population is jewish, friday is a short day, usually lasting until  in the winter, or  in the summer. several proposals have been raised to adjust the work week with the majority of the world, and make sunday a nonworking day, while extending working time of other days or replacing friday with sunday as a work day.

israels development of cuttingedge technologies in software, communications and the life sciences have evoked comparisons with silicon valley. israel is first in the world in expenditure on research and development as a percentage of gdp. it is ranked th in the global innovation index in , down from tenth in  and fifth in the  bloomberg innovation index. israel has  scientists, technicians, and engineers per , employees, the highest number in the world, for comparison the u.s. has  per ,. israel has produced six nobel prizewinning scientists since  and has been frequently ranked as one of the countries with the highest ratios of scientific papers per capita in the world. israel has led the world in stemcell research papers per capita since . israeli universities are ranked among the top  world universities in computer science , mathematics  and chemistry .in , israel was ranked ninth in the world by the futrons space competitiveness index. the israel space agency coordinates all israeli space research programmes with scientific and commercial goals, and have indigenously designed and built at least  commercial, research and spy satellites. some of israels satellites are ranked among the worlds most advanced space systems. shavit is a space launch vehicle produced by israel to launch small satellites into low earth orbit. it was first launched in , making israel the eighth nation to have a space launch capability. in , ilan ramon became israels first astronaut, serving as payload specialist of sts, the fatal mission of the space shuttle columbia.the ongoing shortage of water in the country has spurred innovation in water conservation techniques, and a substantial agricultural modernization, drip irrigation, was invented in israel. israel is also at the technological forefront of desalination and water recycling. the sorek desalination plant is the largest seawater reverse osmosis  desalination facility in the world. by , israels desalination programmes provided roughly  of israels drinking water and it is expected to supply  by  and  by . as of , more than  percent of the water for israeli households, agriculture and industry is artificially produced. the country hosts an annual water technology and environmental control exhibition  conference  that attracts thousands of people from across the world. in , israels water technology industry was worth around  billion a year with annual exports of products and services in the tens of millions of dollars. as a result of innovations in reverse osmosis technology, israel is set to become a net exporter of water in the coming years.

israel has embraced solar energy; its engineers are on the cutting edge of solar energy technology and its solar companies work on projects around the world. over  of israeli homes use solar energy for hot water, the highest per capita in the world. according to government figures, the country saves  of its electricity consumption per year because of its solar energy use in heating. the high annual incident solar irradiance at its geographic latitude creates ideal conditions for what is an internationally renowned solar research and development industry in the negev desert. israel had a modern electric car infrastructure involving a countrywide network of charging stations to facilitate the charging and exchange of car batteries. it was thought that this would have lowered israels oil dependency and lowered the fuel costs of hundreds of israels motorists that use cars powered only by electric batteries. the israeli model was being studied by several countries and being implemented in denmark and australia. however, israels trailblazing electric car company better place shut down in .

israel began producing natural gas from its own offshore gas fields in . between  and , israel had imported gas from egypt via the alarishashkelon pipeline, which was terminated due to egyptian crisis of . in , a natural gas reserve, tamar, was found near the coast of israel. a second natural gas reserve, leviathan, was discovered in . the natural gas reserves in these two fields  could make israel energy secure for more than  years. in , israel began commercial production of natural gas from the tamar field. as of , israel produced over . billion cubic meters  of natural gas a year. israel had  billion cubic meters  of proven reserves of natural gas as of the start of . the leviathan gas field started production in .ketura sun is israels first commercial solar field. built in early  by the arava power company on kibbutz ketura, ketura sun covers twenty acres and is expected to produce green energy amounting to . megawatts . the field consists of , photovoltaic panels made by suntech, which will produce about  gigawatthours  of electricity per year. in the next twenty years, the field will spare the production of some , metric tons of carbon dioxide. the field was inaugurated on  june . on  may  arava power company announced that it had reached financial close on an additional . mw for  projects to be built in the arava and the negev valued at  million nis or approximately  million.

israel has a modern transport system. the country has , kilometres  of paved roads, and  million motor vehicles. the number of motor vehicles per , persons is , relatively low with respect to developed countries. israel has , buses on scheduled routes, operated by several carriers, the largest and oldest of which is egged, serving most of the country. railways stretch across , kilometres  and are operated solely by governmentowned israel railways. following major investments beginning in the early to mids, the number of train passengers per year has grown from . million in , to  million in ; railways are also transporting . million tons of cargo, per year.israel is served by three international airports, ben gurion airport, the countrys main hub for international air travel near tel aviv, ramon airport, which serves the southernmost port city of eilat and haifa airport in the north of the country. ben gurion, israels largest airport, handled over  million passengers in . the country has three main ports the port of haifa, the countrys oldest and largest, on the mediterranean coast, ashdod port; and the smaller port of eilat on the red sea.

tourism, especially religious tourism, is an important industry in israel, with the countrys temperate climate, beaches, archaeological, other historical and biblical sites, and unique geography also drawing tourists. israels security problems have taken their toll on the industry, but the number of incoming tourists is on the rebound. in , a record of . million tourists visited israel, yielding a  percent growth since  and contributed nis  billion to the israeli economy.

housing prices in israel are listed in the top third, with an average of  salaries required to buy an apartment. as of , there are about . million properties in israel, with an annual increase of more than ,. however, the demand for housing exceeds supply, with a shortage of about , apartments as of , and thus rising house prices. as a result, by  housing prices rose by .. high prices do not stop israelis from buying properties. in , israelis took a record of nis . billion in mortgages, an increase of  from .

israels diverse culture stems from the diversity of its population. jews from diaspora communities around the world brought their cultural and religious traditions back with them, creating a melting pot of jewish customs and beliefs. arab influences are present in many cultural spheres, such as architecture, music, and cuisine. israel is the only country in the world where life revolves around the hebrew calendar. work and school holidays are determined by the jewish holidays, and the official day of rest is saturday, the jewish sabbath.

israeli literature is primarily poetry and prose written in hebrew, as part of the renaissance of hebrew as a spoken language since the midth century, although a small body of literature is published in other languages, such as english. by law, two copies of all printed matter published in israel must be deposited in the national library of israel at the hebrew university of jerusalem. in , the law was amended to include audio and video recordings, and other nonprint media. in ,  percent of the , books transferred to the library were in hebrew.in , shmuel yosef agnon shared the nobel prize in literature with german jewish author nelly sachs. leading israeli poets have been yehuda amichai, nathan alterman, leah goldberg, and rachel bluwstein. internationally famous contemporary israeli novelists include amos oz, etgar keret and david grossman. the israeliarab satirist sayed kashua  is also internationally known. israel has also been the home of emile habibi, whose novel the secret life of saeed the pessoptimist, and other writings, won him the israel prize for arabic literature.

israeli music contains musical influences from all over the world; mizrahi and sephardic music, hasidic melodies, greek music, jazz, and pop rock are all part of the music scene. among israels worldrenowned orchestras is the israel philharmonic orchestra, which has been in operation for over seventy years and today performs more than two hundred concerts each year. itzhak perlman, pinchas zukerman and ofra haza are among the internationally acclaimed musicians born in israel. israel has participated in the eurovision song contest nearly every year since , winning the competition four times and hosting it twice. eilat has hosted its own international music festival, the red sea jazz festival, every summer since . the nations canonical folk songs, known as songs of the land of israel, deal with the experiences of the pioneers in building the jewish homeland.

ten israeli films have been final nominees for best foreign language film at the academy awards since the establishment of israel. the  movie ajami was the third consecutive nomination of an israeli film. palestinian israeli filmmakers have made a number of films dealing with the arabisraeli conflict and the status of palestinians within israel, such as mohammed bakris  film jenin, jenin and the syrian bride.continuing the strong theatrical traditions of the yiddish theatre in eastern europe, israel maintains a vibrant theatre scene. founded in , habima theatre in tel aviv is israels oldest repertory theater company and national theater. the ohel theatre, the cameri and gesher theatre all played important roles during different stages of israels cultural development.

although israels role in the world art scene has been relatively minor, israel has several unique artistic traditions. israeli jewish art has been particularly influenced by the kabbalah, the talmud and the zohar. another art movement that held a prominent role in the th century was the school of paris. in the late th and early th century, the yishuvs art was dominated by art trends emanating  bezalel. beginning in the s, the local art scene was heavily influenced by modern french art, first introduced by isaac frenkel. jewish masters of the school of paris , such as soutine, kikoine, frenkel, chagall heavily influenced the subsequent development of israeli art.common themes in israeli art are the mystical cities of safed and jerusalem, the bohemian caf culture of tel aviv, agricultural landscapes, biblical stories and war. today israeli art has delved into optical art, ai art, digital art and the use of salt in sculpture.

architecture in israel is unique in the scope and diversity of architectural movements and fruitions of utopian plans in the th century. due to the immigration of jewish architects from different corners of the globe, architecture in israel has come to reflect different styles. in the early th century jewish architects sought to combine occidental and oriental architecture producing buildings that showcase a myriad of infused styles. the eclectic style gave way to the modernist bauhaus style with the influx of german jewish architects  fleeing nazi persecution. the white city of tel aviv is a unesco heritage site thanks to its white international style buildings. following independence, multiple government projects were commissioned, a grand part built in a brutalist style with heavy emphasis on the use of concrete and the acclimatization to the israels desert climate.several novel ideas such as the garden city were implemented in tel aviv, haifa, jerusalem and more cities, the geddes plan of tel aviv became renown internationally for its revolutionary design and adaptation to the local climate. furthermore, the design of kibbutzim also came to reflect ideology, such as the planning of the circular kibbutz nahalal by richard kauffman. today israeli architecture continues to reflect world trends in architecture as well as the different backgrounds and heritage of israeli architects.

the  freedom of the press annual report by freedom house ranked israel as the middle east and north africas most free country, and th globally. in the  press freedom index by reporters without borders, israel  was placed st of  countries, first in the middle east and north africa region. reporters without borders noted that palestinian journalists are systematically subjected to violence as a result of their coverage of events in the west bank. more than fifty palestinian journalists have been killed by israel since .

the israel museum in jerusalem is one of israels most important cultural institutions and houses the dead sea scrolls, along with an extensive collection of judaica and european art. israels national holocaust museum, yad vashem, is the world central archive of holocaustrelated information. anu  museum of the jewish people on the campus of tel aviv university, is an interactive museum devoted to the history of jewish communities around the world. apart from the major museums in large cities, there are highquality art spaces in many towns and kibbutzim. mishkan leomanut in kibbutz ein harod meuhad is the largest art museum in the north of the country.israel has the highest number of museums per capita in the world. several israeli museums are devoted to islamic culture, including the rockefeller museum and the l. a. mayer institute for islamic art, both in jerusalem. the rockefeller specializes in archaeological remains from the ottoman and other periods of middle east history. it is also the home of the first hominid fossil skull found in western asia, called galilee man. a cast of the skull is on display at the israel museum.

israeli cuisine includes local dishes as well as jewish cuisine brought to the country by immigrants from the diaspora. since the establishment of the state in , and particularly since the late s, an israeli fusion cuisine has developed. israeli cuisine has adopted, and continues to adapt, elements of the mizrahi, sephardi, and ashkenazi styles of cooking. it incorporates many foods traditionally eaten in the levantine, arab, middle eastern and mediterranean cuisines, such as falafel, hummus, shakshouka, couscous, and zaatar. schnitzel, pizza, hamburgers, french fries, rice and salad are also common in israel.roughly half of the israelijewish population attests to keeping kosher at home. kosher restaurants, though rare in the s, make up around a quarter of the total as of , perhaps reflecting the largely secular values of those who dine out. hotel restaurants are much more likely to serve kosher food. the nonkosher retail market was traditionally sparse, but grew rapidly and considerably following the influx of immigrants from the postsoviet states during the s. together with nonkosher fish, rabbits and ostriches, porkoften called white meat in israelis produced and consumed, though it is forbidden by both judaism and islam.

the most popular spectator sports in israel are association football and basketball. the israeli premier league is the countrys premier football league, and the israeli basketball premier league is the premier basketball league. maccabi haifa, maccabi tel aviv, hapoel tel aviv and beitar jerusalem are the largest football clubs. maccabi tel aviv, maccabi haifa and hapoel tel aviv have competed in the uefa champions league and hapoel tel aviv reached the uefa cup quarterfinals. israel hosted and won the  afc asian cup; in  the israel national football team qualified for the fifa world cup, the only time it participated in the world cup. the  asian games, held in tehran, were the last asian games in which israel participated, plagued by the arab countries that refused to compete with israel. israel was excluded from the  asian games and since then has not competed in asian sport events. in , uefa agreed to admit israel, and its football teams now compete in europe. maccabi tel aviv b.c. has won the european championship in basketball six times. in , the country was chosen as a host for the eurobasket .

israel has won nine olympic medals since its first win in , including a gold medal in windsurfing at the  summer olympics. israel has won over  gold medals in the paralympic games and is ranked th in the alltime medal count. the  summer paralympics were hosted by israel. the maccabiah games, an olympicstyle event for jewish and israeli athletes, was inaugurated in the s, and has been held every four years since then. israeli tennis champion shahar peer ranked th in the world on  january . krav maga, a martial art developed by jewish ghetto defenders during the struggle against fascism in europe, is used by the israeli security forces and police. its effectiveness and practical approach to selfdefense, have won it widespread admiration and adherence around the world.

chess is a leading sport in israel and is enjoyed by people of all ages. there are many israeli grandmasters and israeli chess players have won a number of youth world championships. israel stages an annual international championship and hosted the world team chess championship in . the ministry of education and the world chess federation agreed upon a project of teaching chess within israeli schools, and it has been introduced into the curriculum of some schools. the city of beersheba has become a national chess center, with the game being taught in the citys kindergartens. owing partly to soviet immigration, it is home to the largest number of chess grandmasters of any city in the world. the israeli chess team won the silver medal at the  chess olympiad and the bronze, coming in third among  teams, at the  olympiad. israeli grandmaster boris gelfand won the chess world cup  and the  candidates tournament for the right to challenge the world champion. he lost the world chess championship  to reigning world champion anand after a speedchess tie breaker.

onika tanya marajpetty , known professionally as nicki minaj , is a trinidadianborn rapper, singer, and songwriter based in the united states. often referred to as the queen of rap, she is known for her musical versatility, animated flow in her rapping, alter egos, and influence in popular music. she first gained recognition after releasing three mixtapes between  and . 

minajs debut album, pink friday , topped the us billboard  chart; its single super bass reached number three on the us billboard hot  chart and was certified diamond by the riaa. followup album pink friday roman reloaded  explored dancepop and debuted atop the billboard , with its lead single starships peaking in the top five of charts internationally. her third album, the pinkprint , explored personal topics and marked a return to her hip hop roots. its lead single anaconda peaked at number two on the hot  and became the first music video by a solo female rapper to reach one billion views on youtube. minaj released her fourth album queen in , which spawned the us top ten single chunli. in , her collaboration with karol g, tusa, became the longestrunning numberone single on the argentina hot  chart. minaj has been featured on various songs and achieved her first two hot  numberone singles in  with the collaborations say so  and trollz . in , she achieved her first solo numberone with super freaky girl, the lead single from her upcoming fifth studio album pink friday  .minaj is one of the bestselling music artists, with more than  million records sold worldwide. billboard ranked her as the top selling female rapper of the s and one of the greatest rappers of all time. she has twentythree top  singles in the us, the most for any female rapper, with six of those being solo songs. her various accolades include eight american music awards, five mtv video music awards , twelve bet awards, four billboard music awards, a brit award, three guinness world records and ten grammy nominations. outside of music, her film and television career has included voice roles in the animated films ice age continental drift  and the angry birds movie  , supporting roles in the films the other woman  and barbershop the next cut  and being an american idol judge. in , time included her on their annual list of the  most influential people in the world. throughout her career, minajs outspoken views, social media disputes and her fanbase have received significant media coverage.

onika tanya maraj was born on december , , in the saint james district of port of spain, trinidad and tobago. her father was robert maraj , a financial executive and parttime gospel singer of dougla  descent. her mother, carol, is also a gospel singer with afrotrinidadian ancestry. carol worked in payroll and accounting departments during minajs youth. minajs father was addicted to alcohol and crack cocaine and had a violent temper, burning down their house in december . she has an older brother named jelani, a younger brother named micaiah, and a younger sister named ming.as a child, minaj and jelani grew up with their grandmother in saint james in a household with  cousins. carol was working numerous jobs in saint james before getting her green card at the age of . she then moved to the bronx in new york to attend monroe college, leaving both minaj and jelani in trinidad with their grandmother. eventually, when minaj was five, carol got her first house, on th street in south jamaica, queens and brought both minaj and jelani to live with her and their father. minaj recalled, i dont think i had a lot of discipline in my household. my mom motivated me, but it wasnt a strict household. i kind of wanted a strict household.  minaj successfully auditioned for admission to fiorello h. laguardia high school of music  art and performing arts, which focuses on visual and performing arts. after graduation, minaj wanted to become an actress, and she was cast in the offbroadway play in case you forget in .minaj has revealed that she had an abortion as a teenager in her songs all things go and autobiography. she has said that although it has haunted her, she stands by her decision. at the age of , as she struggled with her acting career, she worked as a waitress at a red lobster in the bronx, but was fired for discourtesy to customers. she said she was fired from at least  jobs for similar reasons. other jobs included customer service representative and office management on wall street. minaj recalls buying a bmw as a yearold with the money from waitressing.

minaj briefly signed with brooklyn group full force, in which she rapped in a quartet called the hoodstars composed of loutar , safaree samuels  and even up. in , the group recorded the entrance song for wwe diva victoria, dont mess with, which was featured on the compilation album themeaddict wwe the music, vol.. minaj later left full force and uploaded songs on her myspace profile, sending several of her songs to people in the music industry. later, fendi, ceo of brooklyn label dirty money entertainment, signed minaj to his label in  under a day contract. originally adopting the stage name nicki maraj, she eventually changed it to nicki minaj stating that my real name is maraj. fendi flipped it when he met me because i had such a nasty flowminaj released her first mixtape, playtime is over, on july , , and her second, sucka free, on april , . she released her third mixtape, beam me up scotty, on april , ; it received favorable coverage on bet and mtv. at the time, she was managed by debra antney. one of its tracks, i get crazy, reached number  on the u.s. billboard hot rap songs chart and number  on the hot rb/hiphop songs chart. after minaj was discovered by fellow rapper lil wayne, she signed a recording contract with his young money entertainment. that november, she appeared with gucci mane and trina on the remix of  star bitch by yo gotti.in early february , minaj made her first two appearances on the u.s billboard hot  chart with her features on knockout and up out my face by lil wayne and mariah carey respectively. minaj also appeared on bedrock and roger that on the compilation album, we are young money . the singles peaked at numbers two and , respectively, in the u.s. their parent album reached number nine on the u.s. billboard , and was certified gold by the recording industry association of america . at jayzs suggestion, robin thicke featured minaj on his single shakin it  daddy. allison stewart of the washington post stated that, during that time, she became the goto girl for artists who wanted to add some skank to their tracks without sullying themselves in the process. minaj became the first female solo artist to have seven singles simultaneously charting in the u.s.

on march , , minaj released massive attack featuring sean garrett. intended as the lead single from her forthcoming debut album, pink friday, the song was dropped from the album due to poor commercial performance. the next single, your love, later became the albums lead single. released in june, it peaked at number  on the u.s. billboard hot  and number one on the rap songs chart. in september, minaj released check it out featuring will.i.am and right thru me as followup singles.in october, minaj was featured on kanye wests monster, a posse cut with jayz and rick ross featuring vocals from justin vernon of bon iver. her verse received widespread acclaim with many critics regarding it as the best verse on that song. complex rated minajs monster verse as the numberone best rap verse in the past five years, while sean fennessey of the village voice stated that monster was the track that announced minajs brilliance to most people. shortly after, she performed monster with west and jayz at yankee stadium, becoming the first ever female rapper to perform there. in november , minaj received her first grammy award nomination for her guest verse on ludacris song my chick bad.pink friday was released on november , , debuting at number two and later reaching number one on the billboard , with firstweek sales of , copies. it had the highest sales week for a female rap album this century and second highest sales week overall after lauryn hills the miseducation of lauryn hill . upon release, the album received generally positive reviews from critics. the album was certified platinum in december, with it becoming the first album by a solo female rapper to go platinum in seven years. moment  life featuring drake was released as the fourth single from pink friday shortly after the albums release. the song served as the third single off the album, released as a single on december , . minaj performed right thru me and moment  life as the musical guest on the january , , episode of saturday night live.super bass, the albums fifth single, was released in april . it became a sleeper hit and commercially successful, ultimately peaking at number three in the u.s. and was eventually certified diamond in the u.s. super bass was the highest charting solo single by a female rapper since missy elliotts work it in . the music video has  million views on youtube as of march . early in her career, minaj identified as bisexual and made several references to it in her music. however, she eventually stated in a  rolling stone interview, i think girls are sexy, but im not going to lie and say that i date girls. she once again addressed her sexuality in  on doja cats say so remix. the lyrics divided members of the lgbt community, with some accusing her of bisexual erasure while others voicing there is nothing wrong with originally identifying as bisexual, and then later identifying as straight.minaj was one of the opening acts on britney spears  femme fatale tour. she and kesha appeared on the remix of spears till the world ends, which peaked at number three in the u.s. on august , , nicki experienced a wardrobe malfunction during a live performance on good morning america when she revealed her left nipple. both abc and minaj apologized for the incident, with minaj denying it was a publicity stunt. minaj continued to perform at highprofile events throughout  with donatella versace inviting her to perform with prince for the introduction of a versace collection for hm. she also performed super bass at the  victorias secret fashion show. in july , her cousin nicholas telemaque was murdered near his home in brooklyn, an incident she later references in her songs all things go and champion. in december , minaj was nominated for three grammy awards, including best new artist and best rap album for pink friday. also that year, she won the mtv video music award for best hiphop video for super bass, marking her first vma win.

starships was released in february  as the lead single from minajs forthcoming second album, pink friday roman reloaded. the song reached number five on the u.s. billboard hot , and went on to become the fifth bestselling single of . her crossover into pop music was criticized by some, despite her commercial success. followup singles beez in the trap featuring  chainz and right by my side featuring chris brown were released shortly after.pink friday roman reloaded was eventually released on april , , two months later than initially planned. it was preceded by the promotional singles roman in moscow and stupid hoe. the album debuted at number one on the billboard , with firstweek sales of , copies, and was certified twotimes platinum by the riaa in march . however, the mix of hiphop songs and mainstream pop material received mixed reviews. pound the alarm and va va voom were later released as the final singles from the album. minaj along with fellow rapper m.i.a. joined madonna to perform the single, give me all your luvin during the super bowl xlvi halftime show on february , . minaj was the first solo female rapper to perform at the grammy awards, performing roman holiday during the  ceremony on february . her exorcismthemed performance was controversial, with the american catholic league and its president criticizing her performance.minaj began her headlining pink friday tour on may , , which was followed by the pink friday reloaded tour beginning october , . although she was scheduled to headline the june  hot  summer jam at metlife stadium in new jersey, at the request of lil wayne she canceled her appearance the day of the show after peter rosenberg of the station dismissed her single starships as not real hiphop. the following month, she voiced steffie in the animated film ice age continental drift . minaj won awards for best female video  at the  mtv video music awards and best hiphop at the  mtv europe music awards.an expanded version of pink friday roman reloaded, subtitled the reup, was released on november , , with seven new songs. that month, she was the subject of a threepart e documentary titled nicki minaj my truth. in september, minaj joined the judges panel for the twelfth season of american idol with mariah carey, keith urban, and randy jackson. throughout the show there were disagreements between carey and minaj, with both of them leaving the series at the end of the season.

minajs first liveaction theatrical film the other woman was filmed in spring  and premiered on april , . in late , minaj separated from her longtime boyfriend safaree samuels, whom she had dated since . according to minaj, he had proposed to her, but she declined. several tracks on her forthcoming third album, the pinkprint, are believed to have been heavily inspired by the end of their relationship. minaj began dating rapper meek mill in early , shortly after her breakup with samuels. as she was working on the pinkprint, she described the album as a continuation of the reup with a lot more and said it would focus on her hip hop roots. during an mtv interview, she additionally said that it would be next level and that she has much to talk about.

pills n potions was released as the lead single from the pinkprint in may . in july, she appeared as a featured artist on the song bang bang with singers jessie j and ariana grande, which peaked at number three on the u.s. billboard hot  chart. anaconda was released in august as the second single from the album, peaking at number two, which became her highestcharting single in the u.s. at the time. the music video for anaconda went viral upon release online; it set a hour vevo record, accumulating . million views on its first day of release, breaking the record previously held by miley cyrus for wrecking ball. on november , , minaj hosted the  mtv europe music awards in glasgow, scotland. she also won the best hiphop award for a second time. the pinkprint was officially released on december , , and debuted at number two in the u.s, with first week sales of , equivalent units . upon release, critics praised the production and personal lyrics.at the th grammy awards, minaj received three more grammy award nominations, including a second best rap album nomination for the pinkprint, a best rap song nomination for anaconda and a best pop duo/group performance nomination for bang bang. in march , minaj embarked on her third world tour entitled the pinkprint tour and also became the first female artist to chart four songs simultaneously in the top  of billboards mainstream rb/hiphop airplay chart. at the  bet awards, minaj won her sixth consecutive award for best female hiphop artist, becoming the female rapper with most wins in that category. in august , madame tussauds unveiled a wax figure of minaj, which depicted a pose from the anaconda music video. the attraction received criticism from some, including angharad welsh of the independent, who called it a sexist, racist mistake. despite this, minaj voiced her approval of the wax figure on social media.in may , it was announced that minaj would feature in the third installment of the barbershop film series, alongside ice cube, cedric the entertainer, eve, and other original cast members. titled barbershop the next cut, the film was released on april , . for minajs performance as a sassy hairdresser named draya, she was nominated for a teen choice award for choice movie actress comedy. in september , it was announced that minaj would executive produce and appear in a scripted singlecamera comedy series for abc family  based on her life growing up in queens, new york city. the show was titled nicki and the pilot episode was filmed in minajs hometown in january . in october , minaj stated the filming was postponed for undisclosed reasons. in january , she announced that she had ended her relationship with meek mill.in february , minaj was featured on jason derulos single swalla which reached the top ten in several countries, including a peak of number six in the uk. the following month, minaj signed with the major modeling agency, wilhelmina models. on march , , when her singles no frauds, changed it, and regret in your tears were released simultaneously, minaj broke the record for the most billboard hot  entries for a female artist, which at the time was previously held by aretha franklin. in may , minaj opened the  billboard music awards with a medley performance that was described by elias leight of rolling stone as flamboyantly produced and dexterous. throughout the remainder of , minaj performed guest verses on several singles, including migos motorsport and yo gottis rake it up, both of which peaked inside the top ten in the u.s. at numbers six and eight, respectively. she also featured on katy perrys swish swish, which was certified platinum in the us and canada. she briefly dated rapper nas in  before they broke up in january .

after a social media hiatus, minaj released two singles from her fourth studio album queen. she released chunli and barbie tingz simultaneously on april , , with both reaching number ten and number twentyfive in the u.s. respectively. she performed chunli on saturday night live and the  bet awards. while chun li appears on the tracklist of the album, barbie tingz is only included on the target version of the album. on the red carpet of the  met gala, she announced the title of the album and the original release date. the second single, bed, featuring ariana grande was released on june , , alongside the album preorder, reaching number  on the hot . additionally, minaj appeared as a featured artist on the song fefe along with murda beatz and tekashi ixine. it debuted at number four in the u.s, marking minajs highest debut on the chart at the time, besting the sixth place start of bang bang in . it later peaked at number three and was added to queen in the middle of its first tracking week. the day before the albums release, minaj launched her own beats  radio show, queen radio.queen received multiple delays before finally being released on august , . it debuted at number two on the us billboard  with , albumequivalent units, of which , came from pure album sales. it also debuted at number five in the uk and at number four in australia, marking minajs highest debut in the latter country. minaj later expressed frustration and criticized several people including travis scott, whose album astroworld claimed the top spot for a second week in a row, blocking queen from the top spot. minaj alleged that travis scott sold shirts, merchandise, and ticket passes for an unnannounced tour to boost his album sales. this controversy and queens rollout was documented by several news outlets and commentators. queen received generally positive reviews, with some critics deriding the albums length and direction. the album was certified platinum by the riaa in january , for moving over  million equivalent units.minaj performed at the  mtv video music awards where she also won her fourth mtv video music award for the chunli music video. the same month, she featured on the remix of idol by south korean boy band bts. it debuted and peaked at number eleven in the u.s. which was the groups second highest charting song at the time. she also featured on the song woman like me by british girl group little mix, which was released on october , . a music video was shortly released after, with minaj and little mix later performing the song together at the  mtv europe music awards. she was also featured on dip by american rapper tyga which reached number sixtythree in the u.s. making her the first female artist to have  entries on the billboard hot  chart. she later attended the yearend billboard women in music event, receiving the game changer award for the accomplishment.in september, minaj coheadlined the annual made in america festival and suffered another wardrobe malfunction when the front of her outfit fell open. in november, she was invited to the dwp music festival in china but did not perform due to problems with the company hosting the event. the next year in april , minaj made a surprise guest appearance at the  coachella valley music and arts festival during ariana grandes set where they performed their collaborations side to side and bang bang. however, she experienced technical difficulties with her earpiece. later that month, minaj parted ways with her longtime management team after a mutual agreement, with american entertainment executive irving azoff serving as her new manager.in june , minaj released a standalone single titled megatron along with an accompanying music video. in the u.s, the song debuted at number twenty. a month later, she provided information on her upcoming fifth studio album, appearing on the tonight show starring jimmy fallon, stating that theres definitely a new album, of course. she featured on the song hot girl summer alongside fellow female rapper megan thee stallion in august , which reached number eleven in the u.s.  minaj had a voice role as pinky in the angry birds movie , which was released in august . in november, minaj appeared on the charlies angels original motion picture soundtrack on the song bad to you, along with ariana grande and normani, marking her sixth collaboration with grande. minaj also collaborated with colombian singer karol g on the song tusa, which was released to streaming platforms on november . the song reached fortytwo in the u.s. and reached the top of many other charts including the hot latin songs chart, which made it the first song with two lead female artists to debut in such position. tusa later became the longestrunning number one single in argentina, spending five months on the top of the chart.minaj began dating her childhood friend kenneth petty in december , and after less than a year of dating, filed for a marriage license in august . she announced that they had officially married in october, hyphenating his last name to hers upon marriage. in march , petty was entered into the california megans law database after he was charged for failing to register as a sex offender after he relocated to california. petty had been convicted of attempted rape in new york and had served nearly four years in prison for it. for this new charge, he was sentenced to one year of house arrest and a fine of , usd in .

in january , minaj was featured on nice to meet ya by american singersongwriter meghan trainor. in february, she released a standalone song called yikes as a promotional single. by the end of that month, minaj appeared as a guest judge on the twelfth seasons premiere of the reality television show rupauls drag race.  in may, fellow rapper doja cat announced a collaboration with minaj on two remixes of her song say so. the remix later debuted at number one on the u.s. billboard hot , becoming both minaj and doja cats first single to reach number one in the u.s. it became the allfemale collaboration that had reached number one in the u.s. since fancy by australian rapper iggy azalea featuring english singer charli xcx did it in . it marked the first time that a song by two female rappers reached the top, for which guinness world records later gave them an award. a month later, she released a collaboration with ixine called trollz, which debuted at number one in the u.s. becoming her second number one single. this made her the first female rapper to debut at number one on the billboard hot  since lauryn hill did so in  with doo wop .in july , minaj announced via instagram that she was expecting her first child. she gave birth to a son on september , whom she refers to publicly as papa bear. his real name is still unknown. she featured on singer ty dolla signs track expensive. she continued to appear as a featured artist on several songs in late  and released what that speed bout with producer mike will made it and rapper youngboy never broke again on november . on the th anniversary of her debut album pink friday , minaj announced a sixpart docuseries about her, produced by bron studios and was originally said to premiere on hbo max. in , the streaming platform confirmed it dropped the stillunreleased project.in february , minajs father, robert maraj, died while walking along a road on long island in a hitandrun accident. charles polevich, a yearold man, was charged as the suspect of marajs death. polevich was arraigned and charged with two felonies, which were leaving scene of incident involving death of a person and tampering with or suppressing physical evidence. three months later, she commented on her fathers death in a letter, saying, ... it has been the most devastating loss of my life. i find myself wanting to call him all the time, more so now that hes gone. ... may his soul rest in paradise. he was very loved  will be very missed.in may , minaj released a reissue of her mixtape beam me up scotty , including new songs previously unavailable on streaming services. the reissue debuted at number two on the u.s. billboard , which gave it the highest debut for a female rap mixtape in the u.s. a song from the reissue, titled seeing green featuring fellow young money rappers drake and lil wayne reached number twelve in the u.s. in july, minaj collaborated with fellow rapper bia on the remix of her song whole lotta money. in august, her husbands victim  filed a lawsuit against minaj and her husband kenneth petty for alleged harassment and intimidation. she later gave an interview about the accusations on the daytime talk show the real. while minaj has not publicly commented on the lawsuit, she addressed the accusations in a case filing. hough later voluntarily dropped the case against minaj, with her lawyers claiming jurisdictional issues and telling a judge that it was going to be refiled in california. minajs lawyer countered their claims, saying that the refiling was a frivolous gambit to avoid sanctions and that their claims received an aggressive response.in september, minaj collaborated with english singersongwriter elton johns fifth collaboration album the lockdown sessions . she appeared on the song always love you with john and rapper young thug. later that month, she split with her previous manager irving azoff and is now being managed by wassim slaiby, also known by his management company salxco, who is best known for managing the weeknd and doja cat. english singer jesy nelson released her solo debut, called boyz, which minaj features on. the song peaked at number four in the uk and number sixteen in ireland. in october , minaj appeared as a surprise host for the season six reunion of the reality television show the real housewives of potomac. in november , her  pink friday single super bass received a diamond certification by the riaa, making her the second solo female rapper to receive a diamond certification. minaj won the best hip hop award in the mtv europe music awards , becoming the sixth time she has won this award.

at the beginning of the year, after a social media hiatus, minaj announced a song collaboration with rapper lil baby called do we have a problem. the track was released in february, along with a music video that featured guest appearances from actors joseph sikora and cory hardrict. the video contained a snippet of another lil baby collaboration titled bussin, which was released a week later, on february . do we have a problem debuted and peaked at number two on the u.s. billboard hot . it became minajs twentieth top ten entry in the u.s, extending her record as the female rapper with the most u.s. top ten singles. in a promotional apple music interview with dj zane lowe, minaj said her forthcoming fifth studio album is coming very soon. she described it as fun, gutta, and back to the basics. her other ventures also include fronting the campaign for the heaven spring  collection by marc jacobs, which launched in march.in march, minaj collaborated with fellow rapper coi leray on a song titled blick blick, from the formers debut studio album, trendsetter . prior to the songs release, she revealed that her verse was almost scrapped due to american rapper benzino  leaking the collaboration. later that month, she surprisereleased the standalone single we go up featuring rapper fivio foreign. the drill track was initially teased on minajs social media as a scrapped song from her album, before fans had requested her to release the song. in april, minaj appeared on english television host james cordens carpool karaoke segment, kickstarting its returning broadcast on the late late show with james corden after a twoyear hiatus. after that, she was named the new creative director of american mens magazine maxim and became the new global ambassador and advisor for maximbet, a sports betting brand launched by maxim. she came on board as a stakeholder.in early july, minaj did several live performances by headlining the  essence music festival in new orleans and the  wireless festival in london. the same month, she posted a snippet of a song on social media that samples american singer rick jamess  song, super freak. in july, she announced that the full track would be released in august. she revealed the songs title as super freaky girl and the accompanying cover art for the song. on july  she released a twominute trailer of her upcoming sixpart docuseries titled nicki, produced by canadian production company bron studios. after its initial release, super freaky girl received an extended version called the roman remix, which features the return of her alter ego roman zolanski.super freaky girl debuted at number one in the u.s, making the song minajs third u.s. number one and her first unaccompanied number one. it became the first solo song by a female rapper to debut at number one in the u.s. in  years, after fellow rapper lauryn hills song doo wop  also debuted at number one in . in august , minaj released a compilation album called queen radio volume  with one new track, likkle miss  with skeng. in september , minaj released a remix of super freaky girl called queen mix, which features  other female rappers jt, bia, katie got bandz, akbar v, and maliibu miitch.in september , yung bleu released his single love in the way featuring minaj with video released on september . in october , minaj and skeng released a remix of likkle miss called the fine nine remix featuring spice, destra garcia, patrice roberts, lady leshurr, pamputtae, dovey magnum, lisa mercedez, and london hill. in october , rapper youngboy never broke again released a collaboration with minaj titled i admit. in november , minaj collaborated with lebanese singer myriam fares and colombian singer maluma on tukoh taka which was the official fifa fan festival anthem.on march , , minaj released red ruby da sleeze, her first solo single since super freaky girl ; the songs music video was filmed during the trinidad and tobago carnival. the song samples lumidees  single never leave you . it debuted and peaked at number thirteen on the billboard hot  while hitting number one on the u.s. digital song sales and hot rap songs charts. on march , minaj appeared as a surprise performer during lil waynes set at the  rolling loud california festival. in april , minaj featured on wtf, the lead single from youngboy never broke agains third studio album, dont try this at home. she teamed up with ice spice on the remix to the latters song princess diana, released on april , the first ever release on minajs record label, heavy on it. the remix became the first collaboration between two women to top the hot rap songs chart, and made minaj the woman with the most numberones on the chart . it peaked at number four on the hot  and atop digital song sales chart. minajs next collaboration was german singer kim petrass alone, released on april . it samples better off alone  by alice deejay. the single reached the top in the united kingdom. in may, she featured on pound town , the remix to st. louis rapper sexyy red and tay keiths single, pound town. it reached the top of the digital songs sales. on june , , minaj announced via twitter that her fifth studio album would be released on october , . on june , she announced the albums title, pink friday ,  via her social media, and that the release date was rescheduled to november . the rapper assured fans that the record will be well worth the wait, and followed up by a concert tour in . also in june, she and ice spice released their second collaboration, barbie world with europop band aqua, off the barbie film soundtrack. the song samples aquas  single, barbie girl. peaking at number seven on the hot  and atop digital song sales, it extended her record as the female rapper with the most us toptens and numberones on the latter chart. minaj made guest appearances on young thug and lil uzi verts albums, business is business and pink tape, on the tracks money with the late juice wrld, and the us top endless fashion.

minaj is known for her animated rapping style and unique flow. her rapping is distinctive for its speed and the use of alter egos and accents, primarily british cockney. she often both sings and raps in her songs, and has made use of metaphors, punch lines, and word play. the alter egos are incorporated with her lyrics in british accents  or softspokenness . icet said about minajs rapping style, minaj does her thing. she has her own way of doing it. she has an ill vocal delivery. she kind of reminds me of a female busta rhymes, like how she throws her voice in different directions.jon caramanica of the new york times called minaj a sparkling rapper with a gift for comic accents and unexpected turns of phrase. shes a walking exaggeration, outsize in sound, personality and look. and shes a rapid evolver, discarding old modes as easily as adopting new ones. although many critics describe her technique as bubblegum rap, minaj said what people dont know is that before i was doing that craziness i was doing me, i was just doing regular sounding rap that anyone could hear and identify with. but once i started doing all that weird shitim not mad at it because it got everyones attention. robby seabrook iii of xxl included minaj in list of most unique flows from rappers over the last five years, saying that she has solidified her spot as a leader of the pack for her animated flows, inspiring many other women in hiphop to play with their vocals. she goes from campy to bellicose, excited to eccentric, oftentimes all on one song.noted as a rap artist, she also occasionally lends herself to electronic music genres . pink friday marked her exploration of the genres, spawning electro songs including the popladen super bass. also combining rap with synthesizer music, minajs second album, pink friday roman reloaded, had a number of electrohop and electro pop songs hov lane, whip it, automatic, come on a cone, young forever, fire burns, roman holiday, the boys and beez in the trap; while starships is a eurodance song.her verse on kanye wests monster was critically acclaimed and contributed greatly to her popularity; many critics said she had the best verse in the song. west claimed at one point he considered deleting her verse from the track, because he was worried it would outshine his own work

it was like that moment when i thought about taking nickis verse off of monster because i knew people would say that was the best verse on the best hip hop album of all time or arguably top ten albums of all time. and i would do all that work, eight months of work on dark fantasy and people to this day would say to me my favorite thing was nicki minajs verse. so if i let my ego get the best of me instead of letting that girl get the shot to get that platform to be all she could be, i would take it off or marginalize her, try to stop her from having that shining moment 

tara colley of the conversation described minaj as a preeminent female rapper and that she has consistently straddled the distinct personas of gangsta boss and sexy pop siren without truly committing to either and that her chameleonic ability matches some of raps most verbose, witty, filthy and popfriendly stars such as eminem and lil wayne. zoe johnson of xxl, stated that in recent years minajs beat selection has moved to refined production full of grit and hiphop flare in recent years.

with her parents frequently fighting during her childhood, minaj lived through characters she created as a means of escape. she recalled that fantasy was my reality and her first identity was cookie, who became harajuku barbie and  nicki minaj. in november , minaj assumed the alter ego nicki teresa, wearing a colorful headdress and calling herself healer to her fans during a visit to the garden of dreams foundation at fuse studios in new york. she introduced another alter ego, rosa , to commemorate her december  appearance on lopez tonight.one of minajs most wellknown alteregos is a demon inside her named roman zolanski , minajs twin brother, whose character she assumes when she is angry. roman has been compared to eminems alter ego slim shady, and on romans revenge minaj and eminem collaborate as their alter egos. on her next album, she said that there would be a lot of roman and if youre not familiar with roman, then you will be familiar with him very soon. hes the boy that lives inside of me. hes a lunatic and hes gay and hell be on there a lot. roman has a mother, martha zolanski, who appeared on romans revenge with a british accent and singing on roman holiday for the first time. martha appeared in the moment  life video as minajs apparent fairy godmother.

minaj cites lil wayne, foxy brown, and jayz as major influences i cant even imagine my career, my creative spirit without wayne ... i feel like im still intertwined with him creatively. minaj has called lil wayne her mentor and credited him with discovering her. on foxy brown and jayz, minaj said i really loved foxy as a female rapper. i was really interested in her mind and her aura and i was really, really into jayz. me and my friends in high school, we were reciting all of the jay lyrics. his words were our words in our conversations all the time.she said, further i never really told foxy how much she has influenced me and how much she changed my life adding that foxy brown was the most influential female rapper for her. minaj said in a t magazine interview in  jayz, lil wayne, foxy brown... ... those are the three i keep in my head when im writing because theyve influenced me so much, ... i feel like im a part of all of them.jada pinkett smith is one of minajs role models in her acting career. minaj was inspired by rb singer monica, singing why i love you so much at every talent show she entered. while performing in atlanta as part of her pink friday tour, she called monica one of her alltime greatest musical influences. lauryn hill is also one of minajs major influences, with minaj quoting her lyrics in a high school yearbook. minaj has also cited beyonc, marilyn monroe, madonna, enya, eminem, kanye west, trina, drake, lil kim, lisa left eye lopes, janet jackson, grace jones, remy ma and missy elliott  as influences.she called betsey johnson a fashion inspiration betsey is a free spirit. when i met her the other day, i felt like i knew her for my whole life. shes so warm and considerate and caring. shes amazingly talented and ive been wearing her clothes forever, so to meet her was like, yay i was bowing down to her; shes dope minaj has also expressed appreciation for cyndi laupers style and how her videos inspired her as a teenager when i first went to get my hair colored, i was about  and i wanted blonde highlights. the beautician said, no, you have to get your mother on the phone, and i was just crying and begging. ive always been experimenting. cyndi laupers videos  thats what intrigued me.

billboard listed minaj the fourthmostactive musician on social media on its march  social  chart. minaj is also the most followed rapper on instagram with over  million followers, the first to surpass that number, as well as one of the most followed female musicians on the social media platform. on twitter, she is one of the most followed rappers, with over  million followers on the app, as of july . she joined american idol as a judge in . bet has named minaj as a gay icon. minaj was a vocal proponent of streams counting towards an artists riaa certifications. the organization later announced in  that it would be modernizing the certification process for albums, including ondemand audio and video streams, as reported by yahoo news.minaj has been called as a fashion icon by allure, time, xxl and has been called a camp style icon by refinery. she has cited alexander mcqueen, gianni versace, and christian louboutin as her favorite designers. the huffington post described her style as risktaking and farout, with bold sartorial choices; minaj has been included on the annual maxim hot  list several times. in , minaj underwent a reinvention in her image sporting a natural and softer look, wearing fewer wigs and less colourful costumes. she stated that she went so far to the other side that theres only one place to go from there. you can either continue doing costumes or you can just say, hey guess what this will shock them even more. doing nothing will shock them even more.her physique, notably her buttocks, has attracted significant attention from the media. early in her career, she made autographing breasts part of her movement to empower women. in , she said that although she originally felt obligated to mimic the provocative behavior of the female rappers of her day, she intended to subdue her sexuality because she wants peopleespecially young girlsto know that in life, nothing is going to be based on sex appeal. youve got to have something else to go with that.minaj talked about feminism in an interview with vogue in , saying there are things that i do that feminists dont like, and there are things that i do that they do like. i dont label myself. i just say the truth about what i feel. i feel like women can do anything that they put their minds to. in , an interview with elle, in which she discussed sex workers, her own sex appeal, and sexuality in music and on social media, attracted criticism. in the new york times magazine, music critic vanessa grigoriadis said that minaj has become expert at modelling the ways that women can wield power in the industry. but she has also drawn attention to the ways in which power can be embodied by a woman standing up for herself and speaking her own mind.the cover art and music video for her  single, anaconda, attracted significant media attention upon release. the music video was viewed . million times in its first  hours of release. the guardian called the video racy but noted that she doesnt shy from ruffling her audiences feathers, while others praised minaj for owning her sexuality, examining her work through a feminist perspective. another writer for the guardian said, of the anaconda video, minaj turns the classic song into a conversation, and refuses to let the camera objectify her lap dance by keeping it zoomed out, at a distance.minajs fanbase, known as the barbz, have been reported as often being militant towards minajs critics, including incidents reportedly involving cyberbullying and death threats.

in , minaj performed a cover of girls just wanna have fun, alongside singer katy perry, for service members during the  vh divas salute the troops concert. the two would later collaborate in  on swish swish. in , mattel created a barbie doll with minajs likeness to auction for project angel food, a charity that provides food for people afflicted with hiv and aids. in , in the aftermath of hurricane sandy, minaj donated , to the food bank for new york city and held a turkey drive at her alma mater, ps .in may , minaj offered via twitter to pay college tuition fees and student loans for  of her fans. she appeared to grant their requests, ranging from  to school supplies to , for tuition, promising to respond to more requests in a month or two. she also announced that she would launch an official charity for student loans and tuition payments in the near future. in the same month, minaj revealed on instagram that she has been donating money to a village in india for a few years via her pastor, lydia sloley. these donations helped the village get a computer center, a tailoring institute, a reading program, and two water wells. this is the kind of thing that makes me feel the most proud, she said about the new additions to the village.in august , after hurricane harvey hit the city of houston, texas, minaj answered a social media challenge by comedian and actor kevin hart and donated , to the red cross, saying she was praying for everyone there. on september , , minaj appeared as a guest and performed several songs on the ellen degeneres show. throughout the episode, minaj and degeneres, with the participation of walmart, gave out over , in donations to fans.in , minaj pulled out of headlining a concert in saudi arabia following online backlash from activists, after womens rights activist loujain alhathloul was detained and arrested for speaking out against the saudi regime. minaj was praised by thor halvorssen of the human rights foundation, who criticized her initial plan to perform in a letter, and released a statement saying, after careful reflection ... i believe it is important for me to make clear my support for the rights of women, the lgbtq community and freedom of expression.in , minaj donated , to the st. judes home for girls school after visiting the school in her native country of trinidad. in a speech, minaj encouraged the girls to push through hard obstacles, even referencing her own experience with domestic violence ive experienced being in a home with domestic violence. ive experienced, you know, being at a very difficult crossroads in my life as a teenager. and sometimes as a teenager when things happen, you feel like theres no up from there. in the same year, following the release of minaj and ixines collaboration, trollz, minaj announced that a portion of the proceeds from the song, along with profits from all merchandise, will go towards the bail project amid the black lives matter protests sparked by the murder of george floyd.

various media outlets, such as billboard, time, nme, rolling stone, nbc news and cosmopolitan, have referred to minaj as the queen of rap and the new york times, the washington post, npr, and the los angeles times have referred to her as the queen of hip hop. several media outlets, including the new york times, evening standard, and nylon, have also called her one of the most influential rappers. minaj was ranked as the seventh greatest rapper of all time on billboard and vibes list of the  greatest rappers .in , jon caramanica of the new york times called minaj the most influential female rapper of all time, and in  vanessa grigoriadis from its magazine called her the worlds biggest female rap superstar. in evening standard, jochan embley called her one of the most influential rap artists of all time, saying that everything she does is bold, fearless and distinct  whether that be her eyepopping stage attire or her expertly delivered lyrics, which stare gender and race dead in the eye. zoe johnson from xxl called her one of the most versatile mcs and that she has made millions off upbeat pop hits and traditional hiphop sounds that cater to both her femininity and her assertive side.for npr music, sowmya krishnamurthy noted that minaj has portrayed the quirky, lifesize barbie, glamorous vixen and girlnextdoor, arguing that she changed the landscape for artists in hiphop for the past decade with said alter egos. in , patrik sandberg of dazed argued that minaj has surpassed every other female hip hop artist to become the most successful in history in . in , nick soulsby of popmatters called her the best female rapper and the best rapper of the past ten years  no gender preposition required. glamour included minaj in their list of  women who defined s pop culture.

in xxl, madeline roth commented that minaj has helped birth a new generation of rappers that mimic her style. she has influenced several artists, including tinashe, cher lloyd, cupcakke, billie eilish, lil nas x, ms banks, asian doll, doja cat, megan thee stallion, latto, shenseea, bia, lakeyah, lusa sonza, coi leray, maliibu miitch, city girls, baby tate, ice spice, rico nasty, flo milli, ivorian doll, angel haze, rubi rose, and saweetie. billboard credited her for bringing female rap back to the mainstream in the us. with over  features, the magazine has called minaj a rap and pop icon adding that shes been one of popular musics most reliable guest performers, notching dozens of chart hits as a supporting presence on other artists singles. minaj has been credited by complex for being able to take a simple song and turn it into a smash hit just because shes featured on it. in , caramanica in the new york times said thatminaj became a nimble, evocative rapper. she became an intricate lyricist. she became a thoughtful singer. she became a risky performer. she invented new personae. more than any other rapper in the mainstream, she pushed hard against expectations ... with no one around to compare herself to, or for others to compare her to, she became her own watermark.

in , nprs erik nielson said that minajs success over the last decade has stood as an exception to the unwritten rule that women rappers no longer have a place among elite artists. nylon writer, demicia inman, also credited minaj for her influence which stands as one of the most successful rappers of the millennium, also going on to say that minaj battled misogyny and industry bias against black women to carve her own identity and sound thus impacting her career. complex also commented that, from her bold outfits to her multicolored wigs, minaj oozed confidence that inspired others who were watching closely... she doesnt need anything but her art to speak for itself.

minaj is the recipient of numerous accolades, including nine american music awards, twelve bet awards, eight bet hip hop awards, four billboard music awards, eight mtv video music awards, ten mtv europe music awards, four peoples choice awards, one soul train music award, and four teen choice awards. minaj has received a total of  grammy award nominations. she received her first grammy nomination in  for best rap performance by a duo or group . in , minaj received three nominations, including best new artist and best rap album . in , she received her second nomination for best rap album . she has won the mtv video music award for best hiphop video four times  and has won the best female video award once . minaj is the first woman to have appeared on the forbes hip hop cash kings list since its inception in , having made four consecutive appearances between  and .in , minaj became the first female solo artist to have seven songs on the billboard hot  simultaneously, and the first woman to appear on mtvs annual hottest mc list since its inception in . in , minaj was ranked sixth on the rolling stone master ranking of the kings of hip hop which is based on record sales and social media metrics. she is the only rapper to win the bet award for best female hiphop artist seven consecutive times. in , minaj became the mostcharted female rapper on the billboard hot  at the time, with  entries, tying mariah carey as seventh among women of all genres.minaj has twentyone top  singles on the chart, the most for any female rapper, with six of those being solo songs. in , minaj broke the record for most hot  entries by any female artist, surpassing aretha franklin, and in , she became the first female artist to accumulate  entries on the hot . she held the mentioned record for most hot  entries by a female artist until it was broken in december  by singersongwriter taylor swift. she is the female artist with the secondmost hot  entries, behind swift. in , billboard women in music awarded her with the game changer award.in , her collaboration with karol g, named tusa, received two nominations at the latin grammys. the song became the longestrunning numberone single on the argentina hot , having spent  weeks on the position. in , minaj become the second female rapper to chart at number one on the hot  more than once with her ixine collaboration trollz. she also became the second female to debut atop the chart since lauryn hill in . in the same year, she also was the most streamed female rapper on spotify. in , the music video for anaconda became the first female rap solo song to reach one billion views on youtube.in total, minaj has eight music videos with more than one billion views across all credits on youtube, becoming the first female rapper to do so. she is only one of two female artists to have eight music videos reaching more than one billion views, tying with rihanna . in , she was listed on the time  annual list of the most influential people in the world. she was also featured on one of the physical covers of the issue. complex ranked her eighth on their list of best rappers of the s, being the only female rapper on the list, and named her best rapper alive of .

minaj has a line of fragrances first launched in september . she partnered with give back brands to introduce her first fragrance pink friday, which was nominated for three fifi awards for fragrance of the year, best packaging, and media campaign of the year. flanker editions pink friday special edition and pink friday deluxe edition were released in april and december  respectively.her fourth fragrance minajesty was launched in september , followed by minajesty exotic edition, which was released exclusively to the home shopping network in june . this was followed by the launch of her sixth fragrance onika in september . a year later in , minaj released the pinkprint, her seventh fragrance in support of her third studio album of the same name. in , minaj launched her eighth fragrance trini girl. in , in support of her fourth studio album, she released her ninth fragrance, queen. minajs tenth fragrance pink friday  will be released on amazon and in jcpenney stores on december  and , , in support of her fifth album of the same name.

minaj has been affiliated with several manufacturing companies and has endorsed a number of products during her career. in november , she collaborated with mac cosmetics and launched the lipstick pink  friday, which was sold for four consecutive fridays to promote her debut studio album pink friday. in , mattel crafted a barbie doll with the avatar of minaj, inspired by the rappers likeness for charity, which she described as a major moment in her career. it was auctioned on the charitybuzz website; proceeds benefited nonprofit project angel food. a spokesperson for mattel stated that, barbie is obviously a pop culture icon ... and nicki is a big part of pop culture and also huge within the fashion industry, as well as a big barbie fan. matthew perpetua of rolling stone stated that the minaj barbie doll is notable in that the rapper has made barbie dolls a crucial part of her aesthetic. minaj helped introduce the casio tryx in times square, and created a sixpiece nail polish collection for opi products with colors named after her songs.in february , minaj launched her own range of lip products for mac cosmetics viva glam. in april , minaj helped launch the nokia lumia  in times square. the following month, minaj appeared in television and internet advertisements for pepsis livefornow campaign, which featured a remix of her single moment  life. she endorsed the  viva glam campaign with ricky martin  which raised  million for the mac aids fund  and was the face of the lip product line that year along with him. with designer jeremy scott, minaj signed an endorsement deal with adidas for the brands fall and winter  campaign to appear in internet advertisements and commercials for adidas originals. set to her song, masquerade, her segment of the advertisement was filmed in brooklyn and also featured big sean, derrick rose, sky ferreira and ne in other locations worldwide. she fronted the viva glam spring campaign by herself, which also introduced her limitededition lip product collection, nicki , which was launched in early .in february , minaj starred in bluewater comics fame biographicalcomic series, with her comic book, titled fame nicki minaj. she partnered with beats electronics to introduce her pink pill speakers in april , appearing with deray davis in a commercial for the speakers that same month. she introduced her lifestyle product line, the nicki minaj collection for kmart, composed of clothing, accessories and houseware. in june , minaj and mona scottyoung launched myx fusions, a line of fruitinfused, single serve moscato wine beverage, available in flavors sangria, rose, chardonnay, peach, coconut, mango, and watermelon. minaj serves as a coowner, creative director, and ambassador of the brand.throughout , minaj released spring, summer, and fall clothing collections for kmart. minaj served as the face of roberto cavallis spring and summer campaign of that year. in march , it was announced that minaj was a coowner of the music streaming service tidal. the service specializes in lossless audio and high definition music videos. in addition to minaj and company owner jayz, sixteen stakeholders including beyonc, madonna, rihanna, and kanye west own a  equity stake in the service. in november , minaj released a holiday capsule clothing collection for kmart and its affiliated ecommerce platform, shopyourway. she also released a limitededition couture collection for the retailer, which was also available at her website.in september , she released two lipsticks called nickis nude and the pinkprint  in collaboration with mac cosmetics. in november , minaj starred in hms holiday campaign along with anna ewers, mariacarla boscono, jesse williams, charlee fraser, and elibeidy dani. in march , the rapper appeared in a commercial for the mercedesbenz aclass car. august , minaj starred in the trailer for ea sports madden nfl  video game alongside lil dicky, quavo and other celebrities. the following month, she appeared alongside gucci mane, bella thorne, tommy dorfman, yoo ahin, and jonathan bellini in the campaign for italian clothing brand diesels haute coture collection; she also codesigned a tshirt and denim jacket, titled the bad guy. in november , she costarred with quavo and saturday night live member chris redd in the holiday advertisement campaign for madden nfl .in , minaj announced a collaboration with luxury fashion house fendi, whose chief executive officer serge brunschwig stated the brand shares great affinity with her. minaj represents the fun aspect of the brand, and that the collaboration made sense ... minaj would present it extremely well. minajs capsule collection with the brand, titled fendi prints oninspired by the lyric containing the same words on her  single, chunliwas officially announced in september that year, and released on october , .in march , minaj fronted the campaign for the heaven spring  collection by marc jacobs. in july , she collaborated with rap snacks and released her own potato chip flavor, barbieque honey truffle. the following month, mattel sued rap snacks, claiming the company violated the barbie trademark and had made a deliberate and calculated choice to do so. the lawsuit was settled in september after the company changed the snacks name to barbquin. minaj released a variety pack with rap snacks in october, and a nocho nachos nachos flavor in march , inspired by a lyric on her  single, red ruby da sleeze. also in october , the rapper appeared alongside lil baby, kane brown, pete davidson, and bukayo saka in a trailer for the firstperson shooter video game, call of duty modern warfare ii. a playable character model of minaj in her red ruby persona was released as downloadable content to the video game in july  alongside those of rappers snoop dogg and  savage to commemorate the th anniversary of hiphop musics origin; her character marked the first woman operator of the game.

on march , , minaj announced the launch of her own record label imprint on an episode of her radio show, queen radio. minaj did not reveal the name of the label but did say her longtime friend patty patty duke lauren has signed on as the labels ar. minaj also unveiled her starting roster nana fofie, tate kobang, rico danna, and london hill.on march , , minaj revealed the name of her imprint as heavy on it records. the label currently has a venture with republic records.

in september , minaj announced she would not be attending the  met gala due to the covid vaccine requirement. she stated that she has avoided public appearances and traveling after contracting the virus herself and having to quarantine from her son as a result. she shared several tweets about her unvaccinated status and claimed she wanted to do more research and be comfortable with her decision first. she alleged in a tweet that her cousins friend in trinidad suffered swollen testicles and became impotent as a result of the vaccine. these tweets received backlash where her story about her cousins friend became the subject of jokes and memes. trinidad and tobago health minister terrence deyalsingh declared that her claims were false and that no such report existed.shortly after, minaj recommended other people get the vaccine and set up a twitter poll on covid vaccine brands. she tweeted that she was sure she would get vaccinated herself because of touring. the white house offered her a phone call with a doctor to answer questions about the safety of the vaccine. in an instagram live response two days later, she claimed that she was simply asking questions and she did not give any facts about the vaccine. minaj alleged that reporters harassed her family for a story, with her sharing some text messages she alleged were harassment on social media. in may , olivia truffautwong of the cut alleged that minaj had gotten vaccinated, as the  met gala  requires proof of vaccination and a negative covid pcr test to attend.

studio albums

pink friday 

pink friday roman reloaded 

the pinkprint 

queen 

pink friday  

ice age continental drift 

the other woman 

barbershop the next cut 

the angry birds movie  

pink friday tour 

pink friday reloaded tour 

the pinkprint tour 

the nicki wrld tour 

lil wayne  americas most wanted tour 

lil wayne  i am music ii tour 

britney spears  femme fatale tour 

france , officially the french republic , is a country located primarily in western europe. it also includes overseas regions and territories in the americas and the atlantic, pacific and indian oceans, giving it one of the largest discontiguous exclusive economic zones in the world. metropolitan france shares borders with belgium and luxembourg to the north, germany to the north east, switzerland to the east, italy and monaco to the south east, andorra and spain to the south, and a maritime border with the united kingdom to the north west. its metropolitan area extends from the rhine to the atlantic ocean and from the mediterranean sea to the english channel and the north sea; overseas territories include french guiana in south america, saint pierre and miquelon in the north atlantic, the french west indies, and many islands in oceania and the indian ocean. its eighteen integral regions  span a combined area of , km  and have a total population of over  million as of january . france is a unitary semipresidential republic with its capital in paris, the countrys largest city and main cultural and commercial centre; other major urban areas include marseille, lyon, toulouse, lille, bordeaux, strasbourg and nice.

metropolitan france was settled during the iron age by celtic tribes known as gauls before rome annexed the area in  bc, leading to a distinct galloroman culture. in the early middle ages, the germanic franks formed the kingdom of francia, which became the heartland of the carolingian empire. the treaty of verdun of  partitioned the empire, with west francia becoming the kingdom of france in . in the high middle ages, france was a powerful but decentralized feudal kingdom, but from the midth to the midth centuries, france was plunged into a dynastic conflict with england known as the hundred years war. in the th century, the french renaissance saw culture flourish and a french colonial empire rise. internally, france was dominated by the conflict with the house of habsburg and the french wars of religion between catholics and huguenots. france was successful in the thirty years war and further increased its influence during the reign of louis xiv.the french revolution of  overthrew the ancien rgime and produced the declaration of the rights of man, which expresses the nations ideals to this day. france reached its political and military zenith in the early th century under napoleon bonaparte, subjugating part of continental europe and establishing the first french empire. the french revolutionary and napoleonic wars significantly shaped the course of european history. the collapse of the empire initiated a period of relative decline, in which france endured a tumultuous succession of governments until the founding of the french third republic during the francoprussian war in . subsequent decades saw a period of economic prosperity and cultural and scientific flourishing known as the belle poque. france was one of the major participants of world war i, from which it emerged victorious at great human and economic cost. it was among the allied powers of world war ii, but it surrendered and was occupied by the axis in . following its liberation in , the shortlived fourth republic was established and later dissolved in the course of the defeat in the algerian war. the current fifth republic was formed in  by charles de gaulle. algeria and most french colonies became independent in the s, with the majority retaining close economic and military ties with france.

france retains its centurieslong status as a global centre of art, science and philosophy. it hosts the fifthlargest number of unesco world heritage sites and is the worlds leading tourist destination, receiving over  million foreign visitors in . france is a developed country with a high nominal per capita income globally and its advanced economy ranks among the largest in the world. a great power in global affairs, being one of the five permanent members of the united nations security council and an official nuclearweapon state. france is a founding and leading member of the european union and the eurozone, as well as a key member of the group of seven, north atlantic treaty organization , organisation for economic cooperation and development  and francophonie.

originally applied to the whole frankish empire, the name france comes from the latin francia, or realm of the franks. modern france is still named today francia in italian and spanish, while frankreich in german, frankrijk in dutch and frankrike in swedish and norwegian all mean land/realm of the franks.

the name of the franks is related to the english word frank  the latter stems from the old french franc , ultimately from medieval latin francus , a generalisation of the tribal name that emerged as a late latin borrowing of the reconstructed frankish endonym frank. it has been suggested that the meaning free was adopted because, after the conquest of gaul, only franks were free of taxation, or more generally because they had the status of freemen in contrast to servants or slaves.the etymology of frank is uncertain. it is traditionally derived from the protogermanic word frankn, which translates as javelin or lance , although these weapons may have been named because of their use by the franks, not the other way around.in english, france is pronounced  franss in american english and  frahnss or  franss in british english. the pronunciation with  is mostly confined to accents with the trapbath split such as received pronunciation, though it can be also heard in some other dialects such as cardiff english, in which  is in free variation with .

the oldest traces of archaic humans in what is now france date from approximately . million years ago. neanderthals occupied the region into the upper paleolithic era but were slowly replaced by homo sapiens around , bce. this period witnessed the emergence of cave painting in the dordogne and the pyrenees, including at the famous lascaux site, dated to c. , bc. at the end of the last glacial period , the climate became milder; from approximately , bc, this part of western europe entered the neolithic era, and its inhabitants became sedentary.

after strong demographic and agricultural development between the th and rd millennia bc, metallurgy appeared at the end of the rd millennium bc, initially working gold, copper and bronze, then later iron. france has numerous megalithic sites from the neolithic, including the exceptionally dense carnac stones site .

in  bc, ionian greeks from phocaea founded the colony of massalia , on the shores of the mediterranean sea. this makes it frances oldest city. at the same time, some gallic celtic tribes penetrated parts of eastern and northern france, gradually spreading through the rest of the country between the th and rd century bc.

around  bc, the gallic chieftain brennus and his troops made their way to roman italy through the alps, defeated the romans in the battle of the allia, and besieged and ransomed rome. the gallic invasion left rome weakened, and the gauls continued to harass the region until  bc when they entered into a formal peace treaty with rome. but the romans and the gauls would remain adversaries for the next centuries, and the gauls would continue to be a threat in italy.around  bc, the south of gaul was conquered by the romans, who called this region provincia nostra , which over time evolved into the name provence in french. julius caesar conquered the remainder of gaul and overcame a revolt carried out by the gallic chieftain vercingetorix in  bc. gaul was divided by augustus into roman provinces. many cities were founded during the galloroman period, including lugdunum , which is considered the capital of the gauls.from the s to the s ad, roman gaul suffered a serious crisis with its fortified borders being attacked on several occasions by barbarians. nevertheless, the situation improved in the first half of the th century, which was a period of revival and prosperity for roman gaul. in , emperor constantine i converted to christianity. subsequently, christians who had been persecuted increased rapidly across the entire roman empire. but from the beginning of the th century, the barbarian invasions resumed. teutonic tribes invaded the region from presentday germany, the visigoths settling in the southwest, the burgundians along the rhine river valley, and the franks in the north.

at the end of the antiquity period, ancient gaul was divided into several germanic kingdoms and a remaining galloroman territory, known as the kingdom of syagrius. simultaneously, celtic britons, fleeing the anglosaxon settlement of britain, settled in the western part of armorica. as a result, the armorican peninsula was renamed brittany, celtic culture was revived, and independent petty kingdoms arose in the region.

the first leader to make himself king of all the franks was clovis i, who began his reign in , routing the last forces of the roman governors of the province in . clovis claimed that he would be baptised a christian in the event of his victory against the visigothic kingdom, which was said to have guaranteed the battle. clovis regained the southwest from the visigoths, was baptised in  and made himself master of what is now western germany.

clovis i was the first germanic conqueror after the fall of the roman empire to convert to catholic christianity, rather than arianism; thus france was given the title eldest daughter of the church  by the papacy, and french kings would be called the most christian kings of france .

the franks embraced the christian galloroman culture, and ancient gaul was eventually renamed francia . the germanic franks adopted romanic languages, except in northern gaul where roman settlements were less dense and where germanic languages emerged. clovis made paris his capital and established the merovingian dynasty, but his kingdom would not survive his death. the franks treated land purely as a private possession and divided it among their heirs, so four kingdoms emerged from that of clovis paris, orlans, soissons, and rheims. the last merovingian kings lost power to their mayors of the palace . one mayor of the palace, charles martel, defeated an umayyad invasion of gaul at the battle of tours  and earned respect and power within the frankish kingdoms. his son, pepin the short, seized the crown of francia from the weakened merovingians and founded the carolingian dynasty. pepins son, charlemagne, reunited the frankish kingdoms and built a vast empire across western and central europe.

proclaimed holy roman emperor by pope leo iii and thus establishing in earnest the french governments longtime historical association with the catholic church, charlemagne tried to revive the western roman empire and its cultural grandeur. charlemagnes son, louis i , kept the empire united; however, this carolingian empire would not survive his death. in , under the treaty of verdun, the empire was divided between louis three sons, with east francia going to louis the german, middle francia to lothair i, and west francia to charles the bald. west francia approximated the area occupied by modern france and was its precursor.during the th and th centuries, continually threatened by viking invasions, france became a very decentralised state the nobilitys titles and lands became hereditary, and the authority of the king became more religious than secular and thus was less effective and constantly challenged by powerful noblemen. thus was established feudalism in france. over time, some of the kings vassals would grow so powerful that they often posed a threat to the king. for example, after the battle of hastings in , william the conqueror added king of england to his titles, becoming both the vassal to  and the equal of  the king of france, creating recurring tensions.

the carolingian dynasty ruled france until , when hugh capet, duke of france and count of paris, was crowned king of the franks. his descendantsthe capetians, the house of valois and the house of bourbonprogressively unified the country through wars and dynastic inheritance into the kingdom of france, which was fully declared in  by philip ii of france . later kings would expand their directly possessed domaine royal to cover over half of modern continental france by the th century, including most of the north, centre and west of france. during this process, the royal authority became more and more assertive, centred on a hierarchically conceived society distinguishing nobility, clergy, and commoners.

the french nobility played a prominent role in most crusades to restore christian access to the holy land. french knights made up the bulk of the steady flow of reinforcements throughout the year span of the crusades, in such a fashion that the arabs uniformly referred to the crusaders as franj caring little whether they came from france. the french crusaders also imported the french language into the levant, making french the base of the lingua franca  of the crusader states. french knights also made up the majority in both the hospital and the temple orders. the latter in particular held numerous properties throughout france and by the th century were the principal bankers for the french crown, until philip iv annihilated the order in . the albigensian crusade was launched in  to eliminate the heretical cathars in the southwestern area of modernday france. in the end, the cathars were exterminated and the autonomous county of toulouse was annexed into the crown lands of france.from the th century, the house of plantagenet, the rulers of the county of anjou, succeeded in establishing its dominion over the surrounding provinces of maine and touraine, then progressively built an empire that spanned from england to the pyrenees and covering half of modern france. tensions between the kingdom of france and the plantagenet empire would last a hundred years, until philip ii of france conquered, between  and , most of the continental possessions of the empire, leaving england and aquitaine to the plantagenets.

charles iv the fair died without an heir in . under salic law the crown of france could not pass to a woman nor could the line of kingship pass through the female line. accordingly, the crown passed to philip of valois, rather than through the female line to edward of plantagenet, who would soon become edward iii of england. during the reign of philip of valois, the french monarchy reached the height of its medieval power. however philips seat on the throne was contested by edward iii of england in , and england and france entered the offandon hundred years war. the boundaries changed greatly with time, but landholdings inside france by the english kings remained extensive for decades. with charismatic leaders, such as joan of arc and la hire, strong french counterattacks won back most english continental territories. like the rest of europe, france was struck by the black death, from which half of the  million population of france died.

the french renaissance saw spectacular cultural development and the first standardisation of the french language, which would become the official language of france and the language of europes aristocracy. it also saw a long set of wars, known as the italian wars, between france and the house of habsburg. french explorers such as jacques cartier and samuel de champlain claimed lands in the americas for france, paving the way for the expansion of the french colonial empire. the rise of protestantism in europe led france to a civil war known as the french wars of religion, where, in the most notorious incident, thousands of huguenots were murdered in the st. bartholomews day massacre of . the wars of religion were ended by henry ivs edict of nantes, which granted some freedom of religion to the huguenots. spanish troops, the terror of western europe, assisted the catholic side from  to  and invaded northern france in ; after some skirmishing in the s and s, spain and france returned to allout war between  and . the war cost france , casualties.under louis xiii, cardinal richelieu promoted the centralisation of the state and reinforced royal power by disarming domestic power holders in the s. he systematically destroyed castles of defiant lords and denounced the use of private violence . by the end of the s, richelieu established the royal monopoly of force as the doctrine.from the th to the th century, france was responsible for  of the transatlantic slave trade, second only to great britain during the th century. while the state began condoning the practice with letters patent in the s, louis xiii only formalized this authorization more generally in  in the last year of his reign. by the midth century, nantes had become the principal french slavetrading port.

during louis xivs minority and the regency of queen anne and cardinal mazarin, a period of trouble known as the fronde occurred in france. this rebellion was driven by the great feudal lords and sovereign courts as a reaction to the rise of royal absolute power in france. the monarchy reached its peak during the th century and the reign of louis xiv. by turning powerful feudal lords into courtiers at the palace of versailles, his command of the military went unchallenged. remembered for numerous wars, the socalled sun king made france the leading european power. france became the most populous country in europe and had tremendous influence over european politics, economy, and culture. french became the mostused language in diplomacy, science, literature and international affairs, and remained so until the th century. during his reign, france took colonial control of many overseas territories in the americas, africa and asia. in , louis xiv revoked the edict of nantes, forcing thousands of huguenots into exile and published the code noir providing the legal framework for slavery and expelling jewish people from the french colonies.under the wars of louis xv , france lost new france and most of its indian possessions after its defeat in the seven years war . its european territory kept growing, however, with notable acquisitions such as lorraine  and corsica . an unpopular king, louis xvs weak rule, his illadvised financial, political and military decisionsas well as the decadence of his courtdiscredited the monarchy, which arguably paved the way for the french revolution  years after his death.louis xvi  actively supported the americans with money, fleets and armies, helping them win independence from great britain. france gained revenge but spent so heavily that the government verged on bankruptcya factor that contributed to the french revolution. some of the enlightenment occurred in french intellectual circles, and major scientific breakthroughs and inventions, such as the naming of oxygen  and the first hot air balloon carrying passengers , were achieved by french scientists. french explorers, such as bougainville and laprouse, took part in the voyages of scientific exploration through maritime expeditions around the globe. the enlightenment philosophy, in which reason is advocated as the primary source of legitimacy, undermined the power of and support for the monarchy and also was a factor in the french revolution.

facing financial troubles, louis xvi summoned the estatesgeneral  in may  to propose solutions to his government. as it came to an impasse, the representatives of the third estate formed a national assembly, signalling the outbreak of the french revolution. fearing that the king would suppress the newly created national assembly, insurgents stormed the bastille on  july , a date which would become frances national day.

in early august , the national constituent assembly abolished the privileges of the nobility such as personal serfdom and exclusive hunting rights. through the declaration of the rights of man and of the citizen , france established fundamental rights for men. the declaration affirms the natural and imprescriptible rights of man to liberty, property, security and resistance to oppression. freedom of speech and press were declared, and arbitrary arrests were outlawed. it called for the destruction of aristocratic privileges and proclaimed freedom and equal rights for all men, as well as access to public office based on talent rather than birth. in november , the assembly decided to nationalise and sell all property of the catholic church which had been the largest landowner in the country. in july , a civil constitution of the clergy reorganised the french catholic church, cancelling the authority of the church to levy taxes, et cetera. this fueled much discontent in parts of france, which would contribute to the civil war breaking out some years later. while louis xvi still enjoyed popularity among the population, his disastrous flight to varennes in june  seemed to justify rumours he had tied his hopes of political salvation to the prospects of foreign invasion. his credibility was so deeply undermined that the abolition of the monarchy and the establishment of a republic became an increasing possibility.

in the august  declaration of pillnitz, the emperor of austria and the king of prussia threatened to restore the french monarch by force. in september , the national constituent assembly forced louis xvi to accept the french constitution of , thus turning the french absolute monarchy into a constitutional monarchy. in the newly established legislative assembly , enmity developed and deepened between a group later called the girondins, who favoured war with austria and prussia, and a group later called montagnards or jacobins who opposed such a war. a majority in the assembly in  however saw a war with austria and prussia as a chance to boost the popularity of the revolutionary government and thought that such a war could be won and so declared war on austria on  april .

on  august , an angry crowd threatened the palace of louis xvi, who took refuge in the legislative assembly. a prussian army invaded france later in august . in early september, parisians, infuriated by the prussian army capturing verdun and counterrevolutionary uprisings in the west of france, murdered between , and , prisoners by raiding the parisian prisons. the assembly and the paris city council seemed unable to stop that bloodshed. the national convention, chosen in the first elections under male universal suffrage, on  september  succeeded the legislative assembly and on  september abolished the monarchy by proclaiming the french first republic. louis xvi was convicted of treason and guillotined in january . france had declared war on great britain and the dutch republic in november  and did the same on spain in march ; in the spring of , austria and prussia invaded france; in march, france created a sister republic in the republic of mainz and kept it under control.

also in march , a counterrevolution in vende began, evoked by both the civil constitution of the clergy of  and the nationwide army conscription in early ; elsewhere in france rebellion was brewing too. a factionalist feud in the national convention, smouldering ever since october , came to a climax on  june  with the group of the girondins being forced to resign and leave the convention. by july the counterrevolution had spread to brittany, normandy, bordeaux, marseilles, toulon, and lyon. between october and december , paris convention government took brutal measures to subdue most internal uprisings at the cost of tens of thousands of lives. some historians consider the civil war to have lasted until  with a toll of possibly , lives. by the end of , the allies had been driven from france. 

political disagreements and enmity in the national convention reached unprecedented levels, leading to dozens of convention members being sentenced to death and guillotined. meanwhile, frances external wars in  were prospering, for example in belgium. in , the government seemed to return to indifference towards the desires and needs of the lower classes concerning freedom of  religion and fair distribution of food. until , politicians, apart from inventing a new parliamentary system , busied themselves with dissuading the people from catholicism and royalism.

general napoleon bonaparte seized control of the republic in  becoming first consul and later emperor of the french empire . as a continuation of the french revolutionary wars, changing sets of european coalitions declared wars on napoleons empire. his armies conquered most of continental europe with swift victories such as the battles of jenaauerstadt and austerlitz. members of the bonaparte family were appointed as monarchs in some of the newly established kingdoms.these victories led to the worldwide expansion of french revolutionary ideals and reforms, such as the metric system, the napoleonic code and the declaration of the rights of man. in june  napoleon attacked russia, reaching moscow. thereafter his army disintegrated through supply problems, disease, russian attacks, and finally winter. after the catastrophic russian campaign and the ensuing uprising of european monarchies against his rule, napoleon was defeated. about a million frenchmen died during the napoleonic wars. after his brief return from exile, napoleon was finally defeated in  at the battle of waterloo, and the bourbon monarchy was restored with new constitutional limitations.

the discredited bourbon dynasty was overthrown by the july revolution of , which established the constitutional july monarchy. in that year, french troops began the conquest of algeria, establishing the first colonial presence in africa since napoleons abortive invasion of egypt in . in , general unrest led to the february revolution and the end of the july monarchy. the abolition of slavery and the introduction of male universal suffrage, which were briefly enacted during the french revolution, was reenacted in . in , the president of the french republic, louisnapolon bonaparte, napoleon is nephew, was proclaimed emperor of the second empire, as napoleon iii. he multiplied french interventions abroad, especially in crimea, mexico and italy which resulted in the annexation of the duchy of savoy and the county of nice, then part of the kingdom of sardinia. napoleon iii was unseated following defeat in the francoprussian war of , and his regime was replaced by the third republic. by , the french conquest of algeria was complete, with approximately , algerians killed from famine, disease, and violence.

france had colonial possessions, in various forms since the beginning of the th century, but in the th and th centuries its global overseas colonial empire extended greatly and became the secondlargest in the world behind the british empire. including metropolitan france, the total area of land under french sovereignty reached almost  million square kilometres in the s and s, . of the worlds land. known as the belle poque, the turn of the century was a period characterised by optimism, regional peace, economic prosperity and technological, scientific and cultural innovations. in , state secularism was officially established.

france was invaded by germany and defended by great britain to start world war i in august . a rich industrial area in the northeast was occupied. france and the allies emerged victorious against the central powers at a tremendous human and material cost. world war i left . million french soldiers dead,  of its population. between  and  of soldiers conscripted from  to  were killed. the interbellum years were marked by intense international tensions and a variety of social reforms introduced by the popular front government .

in , france was invaded and quickly defeated by nazi germany. france was divided into a german occupation zone in the north, an italian occupation zone in the southeast and an unoccupied territory, the rest of france, which consisted of the southern french metropolitan territory  and the french empire ; the vichy government, a newly established authoritarian regime collaborating with germany, ruled the unoccupied territory. free france, the governmentinexile led by charles de gaulle, was set up in london.from  to , about , french citizens, including around , jews, were deported to death camps and concentration camps in germany and occupied poland. in september , corsica was the first french metropolitan territory to liberate itself from the axis powers. on  june , the allies invaded normandy, and in august they invaded provence. over the following year, the allies and the french resistance emerged victorious, and french sovereignty was restored with the establishment of the provisional government of the french republic . this interim government, established by de gaulle, aimed to continue to wage war against germany and to purge collaborators from office. it also made several important reforms .

the gprf laid the groundwork for a new constitutional order that resulted in the fourth republic , which saw spectacular economic growth . france was one of the founding members of nato. france attempted to regain control of french indochina but was defeated by the viet minh in  at the climactic battle of dien bien phu. only months later, france faced another anticolonialist conflict in algeria, then treated as an integral part of france and home to over one million european settlers . during the conflict, the french systematically used torture and repression, including extrajudicial killings to keep control of algeria. this conflict wracked the country and nearly led to a coup and civil war in france.during the may  crisis, the weak and unstable fourth republic gave way to the fifth republic, which included a strengthened presidency. in the latter role, de gaulle managed to keep the country together while taking steps to end the algerian war. the war was concluded with the vian accords in  which led to algerian independence. algerian independence came at a high price it resulted in between half a million and one million deaths and over  million internally displaced algerians. around one million piednoirs and harkis fled from algeria to france upon independence. a vestige of the colonial empire are the french overseas departments and territories.

in the context of the cold war, de gaulle pursued a policy of national independence towards the western and eastern blocs. to this end, he withdrew from natos militaryintegrated command , launched a nuclear development programme and made france the fourth nuclear power. he restored cordial francogerman relations to create a european counterweight between the american and soviet spheres of influence. however, he opposed any development of a supranational europe, favouring a europe of sovereign nations. in the wake of the series of worldwide protests of , the revolt of may  had an enormous social impact. it was the watershed moment when a conservative moral ideal  shifted towards a more liberal moral ideal . although the revolt was a political failure  it announced a split between the french people and de gaulle, who resigned shortly after.in the postgaullist era, france remained one of the most developed economies in the world but faced several economic crises that resulted in high unemployment rates and increasing public debt. in the late th and early st centuries, france has been at the forefront of the development of a supranational european union, notably by signing the maastricht treaty  in , establishing the eurozone in  and signing the treaty of lisbon in . france has also gradually but fully reintegrated into nato and has since participated in most natosponsored wars.

since the th century, france has received many immigrants. these have been mostly male foreign workers from european catholic countries who generally returned home when not employed. during the s france faced an economic crisis and allowed new immigrants  to permanently settle in france with their families and acquire french citizenship. it resulted in hundreds of thousands of muslims  living in subsidised public housing and suffering from very high unemployment rates. simultaneously france renounced the assimilation of immigrants, where they were expected to adhere to french traditional values and cultural norms. they were encouraged to retain their distinctive cultures and traditions and required merely to integrate.since the  paris mtro and rer bombings, france has been sporadically targeted by islamist organisations, notably the charlie hebdo attack in january  which provoked the largest public rallies in french history, gathering . million people, the november  paris attacks which resulted in  deaths, the deadliest attack on french soil since world war ii and the deadliest in the european union since the madrid train bombings in , as well as the  nice truck attack, which caused  deaths during bastille day celebrations. opration chammal, frances military efforts to contain isis, killed over , isis troops between  and .

the vast majority of frances territory and population is situated in western europe and is called metropolitan france, to distinguish it from the countrys various overseas polities. it is bordered by the north sea in the north, the english channel in the northwest, the atlantic ocean in the west and the mediterranean sea in the southeast. its land borders consist of belgium and luxembourg in the northeast, germany and switzerland in the east, italy and monaco in the southeast, and andorra and spain in the south and southwest. except for the northeast, most of frances land borders are roughly delineated by natural boundaries and geographic features to the south and southeast, the pyrenees and the alps and the jura, respectively, and to the east, the rhine river. due to its shape, france is often referred to as lhexagone . metropolitan france includes various coastal islands, of which the largest is corsica. metropolitan france is situated mostly between latitudes  and  n, and longitudes  w and  e, on the western edge of europe, and thus lies within the northern temperate zone. its continental part covers about  km from north to south and from east to west.

metropolitan france covers , square kilometres , the largest among european union members. frances total land area, with its overseas departments and territories , is , km , . of the total land area on earth. france possesses a wide variety of landscapes, from coastal plains in the north and west to mountain ranges of the alps in the southeast, the massif central in the southcentral and pyrenees in the southwest.

due to its numerous overseas departments and territories scattered across the planet, france possesses the secondlargest exclusive economic zone  in the world, covering ,, km , just behind the eez of the united states, which covers ,, km , but ahead of the eez of australia, which covers ,, km . its eez covers approximately  of the total surface of all the eezs of the world.

metropolitan france has a wide variety of topographical sets and natural landscapes. large parts of the current territory of france were raised during several tectonic episodes like the hercynian uplift in the paleozoic era, during which the armorican massif, the massif central, the morvan, the vosges and ardennes ranges and the island of corsica were formed. these massifs delineate several sedimentary basins such as the aquitaine basin in the southwest and the paris basin in the north, the latter including several areas of particularly fertile ground such as the silt beds of beauce and brie. various routes of natural passage, such as the rhne valley, allow easy communication. the alpine, pyrenean and jura mountains are much younger and have less eroded forms. at ,. metres  above sea level, mont blanc, located in the alps on the french and italian border, is the highest point in western europe. although  of municipalities are classified as having seismic risks, these risks remain moderate.

the coastlines offer contrasting landscapes mountain ranges along the french riviera, coastal cliffs such as the cte dalbtre, and wide sandy plains in the languedoc. corsica lies off the mediterranean coast. france has an extensive river system consisting of the four major rivers seine, the loire, the garonne, the rhne and their tributaries, whose combined catchment includes over  of the metropolitan territory. the rhne divides the massif central from the alps and flows into the mediterranean sea at the camargue. the garonne meets the dordogne just after bordeaux, forming the gironde estuary, the largest estuary in western europe which after approximately  kilometres  empties into the atlantic ocean. other water courses drain towards the meuse and rhine along the northeastern borders. france has  million square kilometres  of marine waters within three oceans under its jurisdiction, of which  are overseas.

france was one of the first countries to create an environment ministry, in . although it is one of the most industrialised countries in the world, france is ranked only th by carbon dioxide emissions, behind less populous nations such as canada or australia. this is due to the countrys heavy investment in nuclear power following the  oil crisis, which now accounts for  per cent of its electricity production and results in less pollution. according to the  environmental performance index conducted by yale and columbia, france was the fifth most environmentally conscious country in the world .like all european union state members, france agreed to cut carbon emissions by at least  of  levels by , compared to the united states plan to reduce emissions by  of  levels. as of , french carbon dioxide emissions per capita were lower than that of china. the country was set to impose a carbon tax in  at  euros per tonne of carbon emitted, which would have raised  billion euros of revenue annually. however, the plan was abandoned due to fears of burdening french businesses.forests account for  per cent of frances land areathe fourthhighest proportion in europerepresenting an increase of  per cent since . french forests are some of the most diverse in europe, comprising more than  species of trees. france had a  forest landscape integrity index mean score of ./, ranking it rd globally out of  countries. there are nine national parks and  natural parks in france, with the government planning to convert  of its exclusive economic zone into a marine protected area by . a regional nature park  is a public establishment in france between local authorities and the national government covering an inhabited rural area of outstanding beauty, to protect the scenery and heritage as well as setting up sustainable economic development in the area. a pnr sets goals and guidelines for managed human habitation, sustainable economic development and protection of the natural environment based on each parks unique landscape and heritage. the parks foster ecological research programmes and public education in the natural sciences. as of  there are  pnrs in france.

the french republic is divided into  regions , five overseas collectivities, one overseas territory, one special collectivity  new caledonia and one uninhabited island directly under the authority of the minister of overseas france  clipperton.

since , france is divided into  administrative regions  regions in metropolitan france , and five overseas. the regions are further subdivided into  departments, which are numbered mainly alphabetically. the department number is used in postal codes and was formerly used on vehicle registration plates. among the  french departments, five  are in overseas regions  that are simultaneously overseas departments , enjoying the same status as metropolitan departments and are thereby included in the european union.

the  departments are subdivided into  arrondissements, which are, in turn, subdivided into , cantons. these cantons are then divided into , communes, which are municipalities with an elected municipal council. three communesparis, lyon and marseilleare subdivided into  municipal arrondissements.

in addition to the  regions and  departments, the french republic has five overseas collectivities , one sui generis collectivity , one overseas territory , and one island possession in the pacific ocean . overseas collectivities and territories form part of the french republic, but do not form part of the european union or its fiscal area . the pacific collectivities  of french polynesia, wallis and futuna, and new caledonia continue to use the cfp franc whose value is strictly linked to that of the euro. in contrast, the five overseas regions used the french franc and now use the euro.

france is a representative democracy organised as a unitary, semipresidential republic. as one of the earliest republics of the modern world, democratic traditions and values are deeply rooted in french culture, identity and politics. the constitution of the fifth republic was approved by referendum on  september , establishing a framework consisting of executive, legislative and judicial branches. it sought to address the instability of the third and fourth republics by combining elements of both parliamentary and presidential systems, while greatly strengthening the authority of the executive relative to the legislature.the executive branch has two leaders. the president of the republic, currently emmanuel macron, is the head of state, elected directly by universal adult suffrage for a fiveyear term. the prime minister, currently lisabeth borne, is the head of government, appointed by the president to lead the government. the president has the power to dissolve parliament or circumvent it by submitting referendums directly to the people; the president also appoints judges and civil servants, negotiates and ratifies international agreements, as well as serves as commanderinchief of the armed forces. the prime minister determines public policy and oversees the civil service, with an emphasis on domestic matters. in the  presidential election, president macron was reelected.  months later, in the june  legislative elections, macron lost his parliamentary majority and had to form a minority government.

the legislature consists of the french parliament, a bicameral body made up of a lower house, the national assembly  and an upper house, the senate. legislators in the national assembly, known as dputs, represent local constituencies and are directly elected for fiveyear terms. the assembly has the power to dismiss the government by majority vote. senators are chosen by an electoral college for sixyear terms, with half the seats submitted to election every three years. the senates legislative powers are limited; in the event of disagreement between the two chambers, the national assembly has the final say. the parliament is responsible for determining the rules and principles concerning most areas of law, political amnesty, and fiscal policy; however, the government may draft specific details concerning most laws.

until world war ii, radicals were a strong political force in france, embodied by the republican, radical and radicalsocialist party which was the most important party of the third republic. from world war ii until , french politics was dominated by two politically opposed groupings one leftwing, the french section of the workers international, which was succeeded by the socialist party ; and the other rightwing, the gaullist party, whose name changed over time to the rally of the french people , the union of democrats for the republic , the rally for the republic , the union for a popular movement  and the republicans . in the  presidential and legislative elections, the radical centrist party la rpublique en marche  became the dominant force, overtaking both socialists and republicans. lrems opponent in the second round of the  and  presidential elections was the growing farright party national rally . since , europe ecology  the greens  have performed well in mayoral elections in major cities while on a national level, an alliance of left parties  was the secondlargest voting block elected to the lower house in . additionally, rightwing populist rn became the largest opposition party in the national assembly in .the electorate is constitutionally empowered to vote on amendments passed by the parliament and bills submitted by the president. referendums have played a key role in shaping french politics and even foreign policy; voters have decided on such matters as algerias independence, the election of the president by popular vote, the formation of the eu, and the reduction of presidential term limits.

france uses a civil legal system, wherein law arises primarily from written statutes; judges are not to make law, but merely to interpret it . basic principles of the rule of law were laid in the napoleonic code . in agreement with the principles of the declaration of the rights of man and of the citizen, the law should only prohibit actions detrimental to society. as guy canivet, first president of the court of cassation wrote about the management of prisons freedom is the rule, and its restriction is the exception; any restriction of freedom must be provided for by law and must follow the principles of necessity and proportionality. that is, law should lay out prohibitions only if they are needed, and if the inconveniences caused by this restriction do not exceed the inconveniences that the prohibition is supposed to remedy.

french law is divided into two principal areas private law and public law. private law includes, in particular, civil law and criminal law. public law includes, in particular, administrative law and constitutional law. however, in practical terms, french law comprises three principal areas of law civil law, criminal law, and administrative law. criminal laws can only address the future and not the past . while administrative law is often a subcategory of civil law in many countries, it is completely separated in france and each body of law is headed by a specific supreme court ordinary courts  are headed by the court of cassation and administrative courts are headed by the council of state. to be applicable, every law must be officially published in the journal officiel de la rpublique franaise.

france does not recognise religious law as a motivation for the enactment of prohibitions; it has long abolished blasphemy laws and sodomy laws . however, offences against public decency  or disturbing public order  have been used to repress public expressions of homosexuality or street prostitution.

france generally has a positive reputation regarding lgbt rights. since , civil unions for homosexual couples have been permitted, and since , samesex marriage and lgbt adoption are legal. laws prohibiting discriminatory speech in the press are as old as . some consider hate speech laws in france to be too broad or severe, undermining freedom of speech.

france has laws against racism and antisemitism, while the  gayssot act prohibits holocaust denial.

freedom of religion is constitutionally guaranteed by the  declaration of the rights of man and of the citizen. the  french law on the separation of the churches and the state is the basis for lacit  the state does not formally recognise any religion, except in alsacemoselle, which was part of germany in , and continues to subsidize education and clergy of catholicism, lutheranism, calvinism, and judaism. nonetheless, france does recognise religious associations. the parliament has listed many religious movements as dangerous cults since  and has banned wearing conspicuous religious symbols in schools since . in , it banned the wearing of facecovering islamic veils in public; human rights groups such as amnesty international and human rights watch described the law as discriminatory towards muslims. however, it is supported by most of the population.

france is a founding member of the united nations and serves as one of the permanent members of the un security council with veto rights. in , it was described as the best networked state in the world due to its membership in more international institutions than any other country; these include the g, world trade organization , the pacific community  and the indian ocean commission . it is an associate member of the association of caribbean states  and a leading member of the organisation internationale de la francophonie  of  frenchspeaking countries.

as a significant hub for international relations, france has the thirdlargest assembly of diplomatic missions, second only to china and the united states, which are far more populous. it also hosts the headquarters of several international organisations, including the oecd, unesco, interpol, the international bureau of weights and measures, and the oif.french foreign policy after world war ii has been largely shaped by membership in the european union, of which it was a founding member. since the s, france has developed close ties with reunified germany to become the most influential driving force of the eu. in the s, france sought to exclude the british from the european unification process, seeking to build its standing in continental europe. however, since , france has maintained an entente cordiale with the united kingdom, and there has been a strengthening of links between the countries, especially militarily.

france is a member of the north atlantic treaty organization , but under president de gaulle excluded itself from the joint military command, in protest of the special relationship between the united states and britain, and to preserve the independence of french foreign and security policies. under nicolas sarkozy, france rejoined the nato joint military command on  april .france retains strong political and economic influence in its former african colonies  and has supplied economic aid and troops for peacekeeping missions in ivory coast and chad. from  to , france and other african states intervened in support of the malian government in the northern mali conflict.

in , france was the worlds fourthlargest donor of development aid in absolute terms, behind the united states, germany, and the united kingdom. this represents . of its gnp, the th highest among the oecd. aid is provided by the governmental french development agency, which finances primarily humanitarian projects in subsaharan africa, with an emphasis on developing infrastructure, access to health care and education, the implementation of appropriate economic policies and the consolidation of the rule of law and democracy.

the french armed forces  are the military and paramilitary forces of france, under the president of the republic as supreme commander. they consist of the french army , the french navy , the french air and space force , and the national gendarmerie , which serves as both military police and civil police in rural areas. together they are among the largest armed forces in the world and the largest in the eu. according to a  study by crdit suisse, the french armed forces ranked as the worlds sixthmost powerful military, and the second most powerful in europe after russia. frances annual military expenditure in  was us. billion, or . of its gdp, making it the eighth biggest military spender in the world. there has been no national conscription since .france has been a recognised nuclear state since . it is a party to both the comprehensive nucleartestban treaty  and the nuclear nonproliferation treaty. the french nuclear force  consists of four triomphant class submarines equipped with submarinelaunched ballistic missiles. in addition to the submarine fleet, it is estimated that france has about  asmp mediumrange airtoground missiles with nuclear warheads;  are deployed by the air and space force using the mirage n longrange nuclear strike aircraft, while around  are deployed by the french navys super tendard modernis  attack aircraft, which operate from the nuclearpowered aircraft carrier charles de gaulle. the new rafale f aircraft will gradually replace all mirage n and sem in the nuclear strike role with the improved asmpa missile with a nuclear warhead.france has major military industries and one of the largest aerospace sectors in the world. the country has produced such equipment as the rafale fighter, the charles de gaulle aircraft carrier, the exocet missile and the leclerc tank among others. france is actively investing in european joint projects such as the eurocopter tiger, multipurpose frigates, the ucav demonstrator neuron and the airbus am. france is a major arms seller, with most of its arsenals designs available for the export market, except for nuclearpowered devices.

one french intelligence unit, the directorategeneral for external security , is considered to be a component of the armed forces under the authority of the ministry of defense. the other, the central directorate for interior intelligence  is a division of the national police force . frances cybersecurity capabilities are regularly ranked as some of the most robust of any nation in the world.french weapons exported totaled  billion euros in , up from . billion euros the previous year . additionally, the uae alone contributed more than  billion euros arms to the french total. among the largest french defence companies are dassault, thales and safran.

france has a mixed market economy, characterised by sizeable government involvement, and economic diversity. for roughly two centuries, the french economy has consistently ranked among the ten largest globally; it is currently the worlds ninthlargest by purchasing power parity, the seventhlargest by nominal gdp, and the secondlargest in the european union by both metrics. france is considered an economic power, with membership in the group of seven leading industrialised countries, the organisation for economic cooperation and development , and the group of twenty largest economies.

frances economy is highly diversified; services represent twothirds of both the workforce and gdp, while the industrial sector accounts for a fifth of gdp and a similar proportion of employment. france is the thirdbiggest manufacturing country in europe, behind germany and italy, and ranks eighth in the world by share of global manufacturing output, at . per cent. less than  per cent of gdp is generated by the primary sector, namely agriculture; however, frances agricultural sector is among the largest in value and leads the eu in terms of overall production.in , france was the fifthlargest trading nation in the world and the secondlargest in europe, with the value of exports representing over a fifth of gdp. its membership in the eurozone and the broader european single market facilitates access to capital, goods, services, and skilled labour. despite protectionist policies over certain industries, particularly in agriculture, france has generally played a leading role in fostering free trade and commercial integration in europe to enhance its economy. in , it ranked first in europe and th in the world in foreign direct investment, with european countries and the united states being leading sources. according to the bank of france , the leading recipients of fdi were manufacturing, real estate, finance and insurance. the paris region has the highest concentration of multinational firms in europe.under the doctrine of dirigisme, the government historically played a major role in the economy; policies such as indicative planning and nationalisation are credited for contributing to three decades of unprecedented postwar economic growth known as trente glorieuses. at its peak in , the public sector accounted for onefifth of industrial employment and over fourfifths of the credit market. beginning in the late th century, france loosened regulations and state involvement in the economy, with most leading companies now being privately owned; state ownership now dominates only transportation, defence and broadcasting. policies aimed at promoting economic dynamism and privatisation have improved frances economic standing globally it is among the worlds  most innovative countries in the  bloomberg innovation index, and the th most competitive, according to the  global competitiveness report .the paris stock exchange  is one of the oldest in the world, created by louis xv in . in , it merged with counterparts in amsterdam and brussels to form euronext, which in  merged with the new york stock exchange to form nyse euronext, the worlds largest stock exchange. euronext paris, the french branch of nyse euronext, is europes secondlargest stock exchange market, behind the london stock exchange. some examples of the most valuable french companies include lvmh, loral and socite gnrale.france has historically been one of the worlds major agricultural centres and remains a global agricultural powerhouse; france is the worlds sixthbiggest exporter of agricultural products, generating a trade surplus of over . billion. nicknamed the granary of the old continent, over half its total land area is farmland, of which  per cent is devoted to permanent field crops such as cereals. the countrys diverse climate, extensive arable land, modern farming technology, and eu subsidies have made it europes leading agricultural producer and exporter.

with  million international tourist arrivals in , france is the worlds top tourist destination, ahead of spain  and the united states . however, it ranks third in tourismderived income due to the shorter duration of visits. the most popular tourist sites include  eiffel tower , chteau de versailles , musum national dhistoire naturelle , pont du gard , arc de triomphe , mont saintmichel , saintechapelle , chteau du hautknigsbourg , puy de dme , muse picasso , and carcassonne .france, especially paris, has some of the worlds largest and most renowned museums, including the louvre, which is the most visited art museum in the world , the muse dorsay , mostly devoted to impressionism, the muse de lorangerie , which is home to eight large water lily murals by claude monet, as well as the centre georges pompidou , dedicated to contemporary art. disneyland paris is europes most popular theme park, with  million combined visitors to the resorts disneyland park and walt disney studios park in .with more than  million tourists a year, the french riviera , in southeast france, is the second leading tourist destination in the country, after the paris region. it benefits from  days of sunshine per year,  kilometres  of coastline and beaches,  golf courses,  ski resorts and , restaurants. each year the cte dazur hosts  of the worlds superyacht fleet.with  million tourists a year, the castles of the loire valley  and the loire valley itself are the third leading tourist destination in france; this world heritage site is noteworthy for its architectural heritage, in its historic towns but in particular its castles, such as the chteaux damboise, de chambord, duss, de villandry, chenonceau and montsoreau. the chteau de chantilly, versailles and vauxlevicomte, all three located near paris, are also visitor attractions.

france has  sites inscribed in unescos world heritage list and features cities of high cultural interest, beaches and seaside resorts, ski resorts, as well as rural regions that many enjoy for their beauty and tranquillity . small and picturesque french villages are promoted through the association les plus beaux villages de france . the remarkable gardens label is a list of the over  gardens classified by the ministry of culture. this label is intended to protect and promote remarkable gardens and parks. france attracts many religious pilgrims on their way to st. james, or to lourdes, a town in the hautespyrnes that hosts several million visitors a year.

france is the worlds tenthlargest producer of electricity. lectricit de france , which is majorityowned by the french government, is the countrys main producer and distributor of electricity, and one of the worlds largest electric utility companies, ranking third in revenue globally. in , edf produced around onefifth of the european unions electricity, primarily from nuclear power. as of , france was the biggest energy exporter in europe, mostly to the u.k. and italy, and the largest net exporter of electricity in the world.since the  oil crisis, france has pursued a strong policy of energy security, namely through heavy investment in nuclear energy. it is one of  countries with nuclear power plants, ranking second in the world by the number of operational nuclear reactors, at . consequently,  of frances electricity is generated by nuclear power, the highest proportion in the world by a wide margin; only slovakia and ukraine derive a majority of electricity from nuclear power, at roughly  and , respectively. france is considered a world leader in nuclear technology, with reactors and fuel products being major exports.due to its overwhelming reliance on nuclear power, renewable energies have seen relatively little growth compared to other western countries. nevertheless, between  and , frances production capacity from renewable energies rose consistently and nearly doubled. hydropower is by far the leading source, accounting for over half the countrys renewable energy sources and contributing  of its electricity, the highest proportion in europe after norway and turkey. as with nuclear power, most hydroelectric plants, such as eguzon, tang de soulcem, and lac de vouglans, are managed by edf. france aims to further expand hydropower into .

frances railway network, which stretches , kilometres  as of , is the second most extensive in western europe after germany. it is operated by the sncf, and highspeed trains include the thalys, the eurostar and tgv, which travels at  km/h . the eurostar, along with the eurotunnel shuttle, connects with the united kingdom through the channel tunnel. rail connections exist to all other neighbouring countries in europe except andorra. intraurban connections are also well developed, with most major cities having underground or tramway services complementing bus services.

there are approximately ,, kilometres  of serviceable roadway in france, ranking it the most extensive network of the european continent. the paris region is enveloped with the densest network of roads and highways, which connect it with virtually all parts of the country. french roads also handle substantial international traffic, connecting with cities in neighbouring belgium, luxembourg, germany, switzerland, italy, spain, andorra and monaco. there is no annual registration fee or road tax; however, usage of the mostly privately owned motorways is through tolls except in the vicinity of large communes. the new car market is dominated by domestic brands such as renault, peugeot and citron. france possesses the millau viaduct, the worlds tallest bridge, and has built many important bridges such as the pont de normandie. diesel and petroldriven cars and lorries cause a large part of the countrys air pollution and greenhouse gas emissions.there are  airports in france. charles de gaulle airport, located in the vicinity of paris, is the largest and busiest airport in the country, handling the vast majority of popular and commercial traffic and connecting paris with virtually all major cities across the world. air france is the national carrier airline, although numerous private airline companies provide domestic and international travel services. there are ten major ports in france, the largest of which is in marseille, which also is the largest bordering the mediterranean sea., kilometres  of waterways traverse france including the canal du midi, which connects the mediterranean sea to the atlantic ocean through the garonne river.

since the middle ages, france has been a contributor to scientific and technological achievement. in the early th century, the frenchborn pope sylvester ii reintroduced the abacus and armillary sphere and introduced arabic numerals and clocks to much of europe. the university of paris, founded in the midth century, is still one of the most important academic institutions in the western world. in the th century, mathematician and philosopher ren descartes pioneered rationalism as a method for acquiring scientific knowledge, while blaise pascal became famous for his work on probability and fluid mechanics; both were key figures of the scientific revolution, which blossomed in europe during this period. the french academy of sciences, founded in the midth century by louis xiv to encourage and protect french scientific research, was one of the earliest national scientific institutions in history.

the age of enlightenment was marked by the work of biologist buffon, one of the first naturalists to recognise ecological succession, and chemist lavoisier, who discovered the role of oxygen in combustion. diderot and dalembert published the encyclopdie, which aimed to give the public access to useful knowledge that could be applied to everyday life. the industrial revolution of the th century saw spectacular scientific developments in france, with augustin fresnel founding modern optics, sadi carnot laying the foundations of thermodynamics, and louis pasteur pioneering microbiology. other eminent french scientists of the period have their names inscribed on the eiffel tower. 

famous french scientists of the th century include the mathematician and physicist henri poincar; physicists henri becquerel, pierre and marie curie, who remain famous for their work on radioactivity; physicist paul langevin; and virologist luc montagnier, codiscoverer of hiv aids. hand transplantation was developed in lyon in  by an international team that included jeanmichel dubernard, who afterward performed the first successful double hand transplant. telesurgery was first performed by french surgeons led by jacques marescaux on  september  across the atlantic ocean. a face transplant was first done on  november  by bernard devauchelle. france ranked th in the  global innovation index, compared to th in .

with an estimated january  population of ,, people, france is the th most populous country in the world, the thirdmost populous in europe , and the second most populous in the european union .

france is an outlier among developed countries, particularly in europe, for its relatively high rate of natural population growth by birth rates alone, it was responsible for almost all natural population growth in the european union in . between  and , france saw the secondhighest overall increase in population in the eu and was one of only four eu countries where natural births accounted for the most population growth. this was the highest rate since the end of the baby boom in  and coincides with the rise of the total fertility rate from a nadir of . in  to . in .

as of january , the fertility rate declined slightly to . children per woman, below the replacement rate of ., and considerably below the high of . in . frances fertility rate and crude birth rate nonetheless remain among the highest in the eu. however, like many developed nations, the french population is aging; the average age is . years, while about a fifth of french people are  or over. the life expectancy at birth is . years, the th highest in the world.

from  to , population growth averaged . per cent per year; since , annual growth has been between . and . per cent annually. immigrants are major contributors to this trend; in ,  per cent of newborns in metropolitan france had at least one foreignborn parent and another  per cent had at least one parent born outside europe .

historically, french people were mainly of celticgallic origin, with a significant admixture of italic  and germanic  groups reflecting centuries of respective migration and settlement. through the course of the middle ages, france incorporated various neighbouring ethnic and linguistic groups, as evidenced by breton elements in the west, aquitanian in the southwest, scandinavian in the northwest, alemannic in the northeast, and ligurian in the southeast.

largescale immigration over the last century and a half have led to a more multicultural society; beginning with the french revolution, and further codified in the french constitution of , the government is prohibited from collecting data on ethnicity and ancestry; most demographic information is drawn from private sector organisations or academic institutions. in , the institut montaigne estimated that within metropolitan france,  million people were white ,  million were northwest african ,  million were black , and  million were asian .a  poll conducted jointly by the institut national dtudes dmographiques and the french national institute of statistics estimated that the largest ancestry groups were italian , followed by northwest african , subsaharan african , armenian , and turkish . there are also sizeable minorities of other european ethnic groups, namely spanish, portuguese, polish, and greek. france has a significant gitan  population, numbering between , and ,; many foreign roma are expelled back to bulgaria and romania frequently.

it is currently estimated that  of the french population is descended at least partially from the different waves of immigration since the early th century; between  and  alone, about . million net immigrants came to france. the next largest wave came in the s when around . million pieds noirs returned to france following the independence of its northwest african possessions, algeria and morocco. they were joined by numerous former colonial subjects from north and west africa, as well as numerous european immigrants from spain and portugal.

france remains a major destination for immigrants, accepting about , legal immigrants annually. in , it was western europes leading recipient of asylum seekers, with an estimated , applications . in , france received about , asylum applicationsplacing it among the top five asylum recipients in the world and in subsequent years it saw the number of applications increase, ultimately doubling to , in . the european union allows free movement between the member states, although france established controls to curb eastern european migration, and immigration remains a contentious political issue.

in , the insee  estimated that the total number of foreignborn immigrants was around  million , while their frenchborn descendants numbered . million, or  of the population. thus, nearly a fifth of the countrys population were either first or secondgeneration immigrants, of which more than  million were of european origin and  million of maghrebi ancestry. in , france granted citizenship to , persons, mostly from morocco, algeria and turkey.in , the insee reported a significant increase in the number of immigrants coming from spain, portugal and italy between  and . according to the french institute, this increase resulted from the financial crisis that hit several european countries in that period. statistics on spanish immigrants in france show a growth of  per cent between  and , with the population growing from , to ,. of the total of , foreigners who were in france in , nearly  were portuguese,  british,  spanish,  italian,  german,  romanian, and  belgian.

france is a highly urbanised country, with its largest cities  being paris , lyon , marseille , lille , toulouse , bordeaux , nantes , strasbourg , montpellier , and rennes . . rural flight was a perennial political issue throughout most of the th century.

the official language of france is french, a romance language derived from latin. since , the acadmie franaise has been frances official authority on the french language, although its recommendations carry no legal weight. there are also regional languages spoken in france, such as occitan, breton, catalan, flemish , alsatian , basque, and corsican . italian was the official language of corsica until  may .the government of france does not regulate the choice of language in publications by individuals, but the use of french is required by law in commercial and workplace communications. in addition to mandating the use of french in the territory of the republic, the french government tries to promote french in the european union and globally through institutions such as the organisation internationale de la francophonie. the perceived threat from anglicisation has prompted efforts to safeguard the position of the french language in france. besides french, there exist  vernacular minority languages of france, eight spoken in french metropolitan territory and  in the french overseas territories. it is estimated that between  million and  million people worldwide can speak french, either as a mother tongue or as a second language.

according to the  adult education survey, part of a project by the european union and carried out in france by the insee and based on a sample of , persons, french was the native language of . of the total population, or roughly . million people, followed by arabic , portuguese , spanish  and italian . native speakers of other languages made up the remaining . of the population.

france is a secular country in which freedom of religion is a constitutional right. french religious policy is based on the concept of lacit, a strict separation of church and state under which public life is kept completely secular. the exception to this is the region of alsace and moselle where lutheranism, catholicism and judaism enjoy official status and state funding.

according to a survey held in  by institut montaigne and institut franais dopinion publique , . of the total population of france was christian, . had no religion , . were muslims, . were followers of other faiths, and the remaining . were undecided about their faith. estimates of the number of muslims in france vary widely. in , the french ministry of the interior estimated the total number of people of muslim background to be between  and  million . the current jewish community in france is the largest in europe and the third largest in the world after israel and the united states, ranging between , and ,, about . of the population as of .catholicism has been the predominant religion in france for more than a millennium, though it is not as actively practised today as it was. among the , religious buildings in france,  are roman catholic. during the french revolution, activists conducted a brutal campaign of dechristianisation, ending the catholic church as the state religion. in some cases, clergy and churches were attacked, with iconoclasm stripping the churches of statues and ornaments. after alternating between royal and secular republican governments during the th century, in  france passed the  law on the separation of the churches and the state, which established the principle of lacit.to this day, the government is prohibited from recognising any specific right to a religious community . it recognises religious organisations according to formal legal criteria that do not address religious doctrine. conversely, religious organisations are expected to refrain from intervening in policymaking.certain groups, such as scientology, children of god, the unification church, or the order of the solar temple are considered cults ; therefore they do not have the same status as recognised religions in france. secte is considered a pejorative term in france.

the french health care system is one of universal health care largely financed by government national health insurance. in its  assessment of world health care systems, the world health organization found that france provided the close to best overall health care in the world. the french health care system was ranked first worldwide by the world health organization in . in , france spent . of its gdp on health care, or us, per capita, a figure much higher than the average spent by countries in europe but less than in the united states. approximately  of health expenditures are covered by governmentfunded agencies.care is generally free for people affected by chronic diseases  such as cancer, aids or cystic fibrosis. the life expectancy at birth is  years for men and  years for women, one of the highest in the european union and the world. there are . physicians for every  inhabitants in france, and average health care spending per capita was us, in .

as of , approximately , inhabitants  of france are living with hiv/aids.

in , napoleon created the lyce, the second and final stage of secondary education that prepares students for higher education studies or a profession. nevertheless, jules ferry is considered the father of the french modern school, leading reforms in the late th century that established free, secular and compulsory education .french education is centralised and divided into three stages primary, secondary, and higher education. the programme for international student assessment, coordinated by the oecd, ranked frances education as near the oecd average in . france was one of the pisaparticipating countries where school children perceived some of the lowest levels of support and feedback from their teachers. schoolchildren in france reported greater concern about the disciplinary climate and behaviour in classrooms compared to other oecd countries.higher education is divided between public universities and the prestigious and selective grandes coles, such as sciences po paris for political studies, hec paris for economics, polytechnique, the cole des hautes tudes en sciences sociales for social studies and the cole nationale suprieure des mines de paris that produce highprofile engineers, or the cole nationale dadministration for careers in the grands corps of the state. the grandes coles have been criticised for alleged elitism, producing many if not most of frances highranking civil servants, ceos and politicians.

the origins of french art were very much influenced by flemish art and by italian art at the time of the renaissance. jean fouquet, the most famous medieval french painter, is said to have been the first to travel to italy and experience the early renaissance firsthand. the renaissance painting school of fontainebleau was directly inspired by italian painters such as primaticcio and rosso fiorentino, who both worked in france. two of the most famous french artists of the time of the baroque era, nicolas poussin and claude lorrain, lived in italy. 

french artists developed the rococo style in the th century, as a more intimate imitation of the old baroque style, the works of the courtendorsed artists antoine watteau, franois boucher and jeanhonor fragonard being the most representative in the country. the french revolution brought great changes, as napoleon favoured artists of neoclassic style such as jacqueslouis david and the highly influential acadmie des beauxarts defined the style known as academism.

in the second part of the th century, frances influence over painting grew, with the development of new styles of painting such as impressionism and symbolism. the most famous impressionist painters of the period were camille pissarro, douard manet, edgar degas, claude monet and auguste renoir. the second generation of impressioniststyle painters, paul czanne, paul gauguin, toulouselautrec and georges seurat, were also at the avantgarde of artistic evolutions, as well as the fauvist artists henri matisse, andr derain and maurice de vlaminck.at the beginning of the th century, cubism was developed by georges braque and the spanish painter pablo picasso, living in paris. other foreign artists also settled and worked in or near paris, such as vincent van gogh, marc chagall, amedeo modigliani and wassily kandinsky.

there are many art museums in france, the most famous of which being the stateowned muse du louvre, which collects artwork from the th century and earlier. the muse dorsay was inaugurated in  in the old railway station gare dorsay, in a major reorganisation of national art collections, to gather french paintings from the second part of the th century . it was voted the best museum in the world in . modern works are presented in the muse national dart moderne, which moved in  to the centre georges pompidou. these three stateowned museums are visited by close to  million people a year.

during the middle ages, many fortified castles were built by feudal nobles to mark their powers. some french castles that survived are chinon, chteau dangers, the massive chteau de vincennes and the socalled cathar castles. during this era, france had been using romanesque architecture like most of western europe.

gothic architecture, originally named opus francigenum meaning french work, was born in ledefrance and was the first french style of architecture to be imitated throughout europe. northern france is the home of some of the most important gothic cathedrals and basilicas, the first of these being the saint denis basilica ; other important french gothic cathedrals are notredame de chartres and notredame damiens. the kings were crowned in another important gothic church notredame de reims.the final victory in the hundred years war marked an important stage in the evolution of french architecture. it was the time of the french renaissance and several artists from italy were invited to the french court; many residential palaces were built in the loire valley, from  as a first reference the chteau de montsoreau. examples of such residential castles include the chteau de chambord, the chteau de chenonceau, or the chteau damboise.

following the renaissance and the end of the middle ages, baroque architecture replaced the traditional gothic style. however, in france, baroque architecture found greater success in the secular domain than in the religious one. in the secular domain, the palace of versailles has many baroque features. jules hardouin mansart, who designed the extensions to versailles, was one of the most influential french architects of the baroque era; he is famous for his dome at les invalides. some of the most impressive provincial baroque architecture is found in places that were not yet french such as place stanislas in nancy. on the military architectural side, vauban designed some of the most efficient fortresses in europe and became an influential military architect; as a result, imitations of his works can be found all over europe, the americas, russia and turkey.after the revolution, the republicans favoured neoclassicism although it was introduced in france before the revolution with such buildings as the parisian pantheon or the capitole de toulouse. built during the first french empire, the arc de triomphe and sainte mariemadeleine represent the best example of empirestyle architecture. under napoleon iii, a new wave of urbanism and architecture was given birth; extravagant buildings such as the neobaroque palais garnier were built. the urban planning of the time was very organised and rigorous; most notably, haussmanns renovation of paris. the architecture associated with this era is named second empire in english, the term being taken from the second french empire. at this time there was a strong gothic resurgence across europe and in france; the associated architect was eugne violletleduc. in the late th century, gustave eiffel designed many bridges, such as the garabit viaduct, and remains one of the most influential bridge designers of his time, although he is best remembered for the eiffel tower.

in the th century, frenchswiss architect le corbusier designed several buildings in france. more recently, french architects have combined both modern and old architectural styles. the louvre pyramid is an example of modern architecture added to an older building. the most difficult buildings to integrate within french cities are skyscrapers, as they are visible from afar. for instance, in paris, since , new buildings had to be under  metres . frances largest financial district is la dfense, where a significant number of skyscrapers are located. other massive buildings that are a challenge to integrate into their environment are large bridges; an example of the way this has been done is the millau viaduct. some famous modern french architects include jean nouvel, dominique perrault, christian de portzamparc and paul andreu.

the earliest french literature dates from the middle ages when what is now known as modern france did not have a single, uniform language. there were several languages and dialects, and writers used their own spelling and grammar. some authors of french medieval texts, such as tristan and iseult and lancelotgrail are unknown. three famous medieval authors are chrtien de troyes, christine de pizan , and duke william ix of aquitaine . much medieval french poetry and literature was inspired by the legends of the carolingian cycle, such as the song of roland and the various chansons de geste. the roman de renart, written in  by perrout de saint cloude, tells the story of the medieval character reynard  and is another example of early french writing. an important thcentury writer was franois rabelais, who wrote five popular early picaresque novels. rabelais was also in regular communication with marguerite de navarre, author of the heptameron. another thcentury author was michel de montaigne, whose most famous work, essais, started a literary genre.french literature and poetry flourished during the th and th centuries. denis diderots bestknown works are jacques the fatalist and rameaus nephew. he is best known, however, as the main editor of the encyclopdie, whose aim was, to sum up all the knowledge of his century  and to fight ignorance and obscurantism. during that same century, charles perrault was a prolific writer of childrens fairy tales including puss in boots, cinderella, sleeping beauty and bluebeard. at the start of the th century, symbolist poetry was an important movement in french literature, with poets such as charles baudelaire, paul verlaine and stphane mallarm.the th century saw the writings of many renowned french authors. victor hugo is sometimes seen as the greatest french writer of all time for excelling in all literary genres. the preface of his play cromwell is considered to be the manifesto of the romantic movement. les contemplations and la lgende des sicles are considered poetic masterpieces, hugos verse has been compared to that of shakespeare, dante and homer. his novel les misrables is widely seen as one of the greatest novels ever written and the hunchback of notre dame has remained immensely popular. other major authors of that century include alexandre dumas , jules verne , mile zola , honor de balzac , guy de maupassant, thophile gautier and stendhal , whose works are among the most well known in france and the world.

in the early th century france was a haven for literary freedom. works banned for obscenity in the us, the uk and other anglophone nations were published in france decades before they were available in the respective authors home countries. the french were disinclined to punish literary figures for their writing, and prosecutions were rare. important writers of the th century include marcel proust, louisferdinand cline, jean cocteau, albert camus, and jeanpaul sartre. antoine de saint exupry wrote the little prince, which has remained popular for decades and is one of the best selling books in history.medieval philosophy was dominated by scholasticism until the emergence of humanism in the renaissance. modern philosophy began in france in the th century with the philosophy of ren descartes, blaise pascal and nicolas malebranche. descartes was the first western philosopher since ancient times to attempt to build a philosophical system from the ground up rather than building on the work of predecessors. france in the th century saw major philipshocial contributions from voltaire who came to embody the enlightenment and jeanjacques rousseau whose work highly influenced the french revolution. french philosophers made major contributions to the field in the th century including the existentialist works of simone de beauvoir, camus, and sartre. other influential contributions during this time include the moral and political works of simone weil, contributions to structuralism including from claude lvistrauss and the poststructuralist works by michel foucault.

france has a long and varied musical history. it experienced a golden age in the th century thanks to louis xiv, who employed many talented musicians and composers in the royal court. the most renowned composers of this period include marcantoine charpentier, franois couperin, michelrichard delalande, jeanbaptiste lully and marin marais, all of them composers at the court. after the death of the roi soleil, french musical creation lost dynamism, but in the next century the music of jeanphilippe rameau reached some prestige, and today he is still one of the most renowned french composers. rameau became the dominant composer of french opera and the leading french composer of the harpsichord.rik satie was a key member of the earlythcentury parisian avantgarde, best known for his gymnopdies. francis poulencs bestknown works are his piano suite trois mouvements perptuels , the ballet les biches , the concert champtre  for harpsichord and orchestra, the opera dialogues des carmlites  and the gloria  for soprano, choir and orchestra. maurice ravel and claude debussy are the most prominent figures associated with impressionist music. debussy was among the most influential composers of the late th and early th centuries, and his use of nontraditional scales and chromaticism influenced many composers who followed. debussys music is noted for its sensory content and frequent usage of atonality. the two composers invented new musical forms and new sounds. ravels piano compositions, such as jeux deau, miroirs, le tombeau de couperin and gaspard de la nuit, demand considerable virtuosity. his mastery of orchestration is evident in the rapsodie espagnole, daphnis et chlo, his arrangement of modest mussorgskys pictures at an exhibition and his orchestral work bolro . more recently, in the middle of the th century, maurice ohana, pierre schaeffer and pierre boulez contributed to the evolution of contemporary classical music.french music then followed the rapid emergence of pop and rock music in the middle of the th century. although englishspeaking creations achieved popularity in the country, french pop music, known as chanson franaise, has also remained very popular. among the most important french artists of the century are dith piaf, georges brassens, lo ferr, charles aznavour and serge gainsbourg. although there are very few rock bands in france compared to englishspeaking countries, bands such as noir dsir, mano negra, niagara, les rita mitsouko and more recently superbus, phoenix and gojira, or shaka ponk, have reached worldwide popularity.

france has historical and strong links with cinema, with two frenchmen, auguste and louis lumire  credited with creating cinema in . the worlds first female filmmaker, alice guyblach, was also from france. several important cinematic movements, including the late s and s nouvelle vague, began in the country. it is noted for having a strong film industry, due in part to protections afforded by the government of france. france remains a leader in filmmaking, as of  producing more films than any other european country. the nation also hosts the cannes festival, one of the most important and famous film festivals in the world.apart from its strong and innovative film tradition, france has also been a gathering spot for artists from across europe and the world. for this reason, french cinema is sometimes intertwined with the cinema of foreign nations. directors from nations such as poland , argentina , russia , austria  and georgia  are prominent in the ranks of french cinema. conversely, french directors have had prolific and influential careers in other countries, such as luc besson, jacques tourneur or francis veber in the united states. although the french film market is dominated by hollywood, france is the only nation in the world where american films make up the smallest share of total film revenues, at , compared with  in germany and  in japan. french films account for  of the total film revenues of france, which is the highest percentage of national film revenues in the developed world outside the united states, compared to  in spain and  in the uk. in  france was the second greatest exporter of films in the world, after the united states.as part of its advocacy of cultural exception, a political concept of treating culture differently from other commercial products, france succeeded in convincing all eu members to refuse to include culture and audiovisuals in the list of liberalised sectors of the wto in . moreover, this decision was confirmed in a vote by unesco in  the principle of cultural exception won an overwhelming victory with  countries voting for it and only  countries, the united states and israel, voting against it.

fashion has been an important industry and cultural export of france since the th century, and modern haute couture originated in paris in the s. today, paris, along with london, milan, and new york city, is considered one of the worlds fashion capitals, and the city is home or headquarters to many of the premier fashion houses. the expression haute couture is, in france, a legally protected name, guaranteeing certain quality standards.

the association of france with fashion and style  dates largely to the reign of louis xiv when the luxury goods industries in france came increasingly under royal control and the french royal court became, arguably, the arbiter of taste and style in europe. but france renewed its dominance of the high fashion  industry in the years  through the establishment of the great couturier houses such as chanel, dior, and givenchy. the french perfume industry is the world leader in its sector and is centred on the town of grasse.according to  data compiled by deloitte, louis vuitton moet hennessey , a french brand, is the largest luxury company in the world by sales, selling more than twice the amount of its nearest competitor. moreover, france also possesses  of the top  luxury goods companies by sales , more than any other country in the world.

in , regional daily newspapers  more than doubled the sales of national newspapers 

in , after years of centralised monopoly on radio and television, the governmental agency ortf was split into several national institutions, but the three alreadyexisting tv channels and four national radio stations remained under state control. it was only in  that the government allowed free broadcasting in the territory, ending the state monopoly on radio.

french cuisine is renowned for being one of the finest in the world. different regions have different styles. in the north, butter and cream are common ingredients, whereas olive oil is more commonly used in the south. each region of france has traditional specialties cassoulet in the southwest, choucroute in alsace, quiche in the lorraine region, beef bourguignon in burgundy, provenal tapenade, etc. france is most famous for its wines, and cheeses, which are often named for the territory where they are produced . a meal typically consists of three courses, entre , plat principal , and fromage  or dessert, sometimes with a salad served before the cheese or dessert.

french cuisine is also regarded as a key element of the quality of life and the attractiveness of france. a french publication, the michelin guide, awards michelin stars for excellence to a select few establishments. the acquisition or loss of a star can have dramatic effects on the success of a restaurant. by , the michelin guide had awarded  stars to french restaurants.in addition to its wine tradition, france is also a major producer of beer and rum. the three main french brewing regions are alsace , nordpasdecalais and lorraine. french rum is made in distilleries located on islands in the atlantic and indian oceans.

france hosts the worlds biggest annual sporting event, the tour de france. other popular sports played in france include football, judo, tennis, rugby union and ptanque. france has hosted events such as the  and  fifa world cups, the  rugby world cup, and will host the  rugby world cup. the country also hosted the  european nations cup, uefa euro , uefa euro  and  fifa womens world cup. the stade de france in saintdenis is frances largest stadium and was the venue for the  fifa world cup and  rugby world cup finals. since , france is famous for its  hours of le mans sports car endurance race. several major tennis tournaments take place in france, including the paris masters and the french open, one of the four grand slam tournaments. french martial arts include savate and fencing.france has a close association with the modern olympic games; it was a french aristocrat, baron pierre de coubertin, who suggested the games revival, at the end of the th century. after athens was awarded the first games, in reference to the olympics greek origins, paris hosted the second games in . paris was the first home of the international olympic committee, before it moved to lausanne. since , france has hosted the olympics on  further occasions the  summer olympics, again in paris and three winter games . similar to the olympics, france introduced olympics for the deaf people  in  with the idea of a french deaf car mechanic, eugne rubensalcais who paved the way to organise the inaugural edition of the summer deaflympics in paris.both the national football team and the national rugby union team are nicknamed les bleus in reference to the teams shirt colour as well as the national french tricolour flag. football is the most popular sport in france, with over ,, registered players and over , registered clubs.the french open, also called rolandgarros, is a major tennis tournament held over two weeks between late may and early june at the stade rolandgarros in paris. it is the premier clay court tennis championship event in the world and the second of four annual grand slam tournaments.rugby union is popular, particularly in paris and the southwest of france. the national rugby union team has competed at every rugby world cup; it takes part in the annual six nations championship.

pablo emilio escobar gaviria  was a colombian drug lord, narcoterrorist, and politician, who was the founder and sole leader of the medelln cartel. dubbed the king of cocaine, escobar was the wealthiest criminal in history, having amassed an estimated net worth of us billion by the time of his deathequivalent to  billion as of while his drug cartel monopolized the cocaine trade into the united states in the s and early s.born in rionegro and raised in medelln, escobar studied briefly at universidad autnoma latinoamericana of medelln, but left without graduating; he instead began engaging in criminal activity, selling illegal cigarettes and fake lottery tickets, as well as participating in motor vehicle theft. in the early s, he began to work for various drug smugglers, often kidnapping and holding people for ransom.

in , escobar founded the medelln cartel, which distributed powder cocaine, and established the first smuggling routes from peru, bolivia and ecuador, through colombia and eventually into the united states. escobars infiltration into the u.s. created exponential demand for cocaine and by the s it was estimated escobar led monthly shipments of  to  tons of cocaine into the country from colombia. as a result, he quickly became one of the richest people in the world, but constantly battled rival cartels domestically and abroad, leading to massacres and the murders of police officers, judges, locals, and prominent politicians, making colombia the murder capital of the world.in the  colombian parliamentary election, escobar was elected as an alternate member of the chamber of representatives as part of the liberal party. through this, he was responsible for community projects such as the construction of houses and football fields, which gained him popularity among the locals of the towns that he frequented. however, escobars political ambitions were thwarted by the colombian and u.s. governments, who routinely pushed for his arrest, with escobar widely believed to have orchestrated the avianca flight  and das building bombings in retaliation.

in , escobar surrendered to authorities, and was sentenced to five years imprisonment on a host of charges, but struck a deal of no extradition with colombian president csar gaviria, with the ability of being housed in his own, selfbuilt prison, la catedral. in , escobar escaped and went into hiding when authorities attempted to move him to a more standard holding facility, leading to a nationwide manhunt. as a result, the medelln cartel crumbled, and in , escobar was killed in his hometown by colombian national police, a day after his th birthday.escobars legacy remains controversial; while many denounce the heinous nature of his crimes, he was seen as a robin hoodlike figure for many in colombia, as he provided many amenities to the poor. his killing was mourned and his funeral attended by over , people. additionally, his private estate, hacienda npoles, has been transformed into a theme park. his life has also served as inspiration for or has been dramatized widely in film, television, and in music.

pablo emilio escobar gaviria was born on  december  in rionegro, antioquia department. he was the third of seven children and grew up in poverty, in the neighboring city of medellin. his father was a small farmer and his mother was a teacher. escobar left high school in  just before his th birthday, before returning two years later with his cousin gustavo gaviria. at this time, the hard life on the streets of medellin had polished them into gangster bullies in the eyes of teachers. the two dropped out of school after more than a year, but escobar, who did not give up, briefly became autonomous in latin america by forging high school diplomas. he then studied in college with the goal of becoming a criminal lawyer, a politician, and eventually the president, but had to give up because of lack of money.

escobar started his criminal career with his gang by stealing tombstones, sandblasting their inscriptions, and reselling them. after dropping out of school, escobar began to join gangs to steal cars. escobar soon became involved in violent crime, employing criminals to kidnap people who owed him money and demand ransoms, sometimes tearing up ransom notes even when escobar had received the ransom. his most famous kidnapping victim was businessman diego echavarria, who was kidnapped and eventually killed in the summer of , escobar received a , ransom from the echavarria family; his gang became wellknown for this kidnapping.

escobar had been involved in organized crime for a decade when the cocaine trade began to spread in colombia in the mids. escobars meteoric rise caught the attention of the colombian security service , who arrested him in may  on his return from drug trafficking in ecuador. das agents found  kg of cocaine in the spare tire of escobars car. escobar managed to change the first judge in the lawsuit and bribed the second judge, so he was released along with other prisoners. the following year, the agent who arrested escobar was assassinated. escobar continued to bribe and intimidate colombian law enforcement agencies, in the same fashion. his carrotandstick strategy of bribing public officials and political candidates in colombia, in addition to sending hitmen to murder the ones who rejected his bribes, came to be known as silver or lead, meaning money or death. the medelln cartel and the cali cartel both managed to bribe colombian politicians, and campaigned for both the conservative and liberal parties. hence, escobar and many other colombian drug lords were pulling strings in every level of the colombian government, because many of the political candidates whom they backed financially were eventually elected. although the medelln cartel was only established in the early s, it expanded after escobar met several drug lords on a farm in april , and by the end of  they had transported some , kilograms of cocaine to the united states.

soon, the demand for cocaine greatly increased in the united states, which led to escobar organizing more smuggling shipments, routes, and distribution networks in south florida, california, puerto rico, and other parts of the country. he and cartel cofounder carlos lehder worked together to develop a new transshipment point in the bahamas, an island called normans cay about  km  southeast of the florida coast. according to his brother, escobar did not purchase normans cay; it was instead a sole venture of lehders. escobar and robert vesco purchased most of the land on the island, which included a kilometre  airstrip, a harbor, a hotel, houses, boats, and aircraft, and they built a refrigerated warehouse to store the cocaine. from  to , this was used as a central smuggling route for the medelln cartel. with the enormous profits generated by this route, escobar was soon able to purchase  square kilometres  of land in antioquia for several million dollars, on which he built the hacienda npoles. the luxury house he created contained a zoo, a lake, a sculpture garden, a private bullring, and other amenities for his family and the cartel.

escobar was also involved in philanthropy in colombia and paid handsomely for the staff of his cocaine lab. escobar spent millions developing some of medellns poorest neighborhoods. he built housing complexes, parks, football stadiums, hospitals, schools, and churches. escobar also entered politics in the s and participated in and supported the formation of the liberal party of colombia. in , he successfully entered the colombian congress. although only an alternate, he was automatically granted parliamentary immunity and the right to a diplomatic passport under colombian law. at the same time, escobar was gradually becoming a public figure, and because of his charitable work, he was known as robin hood paisa. he alleged once in an interview that his fortune came from a bicycle rental company he founded when he was  years old.

in congress, the new minister of justice, rodrigo larabonilla, had become escobars opponent, accusing escobar of criminal activity from the very first day of congress. escobars arrest in  was investigated by larabonillas subordinates. a few months later, liberal leader luis carlos galn expelled escobar from the party. although escobar fought back, he announced his retirement from politics in january . three months later, larabonilla was murdered.the colombian judiciary had been a target of escobar throughout the mids. while bribing and murdering several judges, in the fall of , the wanted escobar requested the colombian government to allow his conditional surrender without extradition to the united states. the proposal was initially answered in the negative, and escobar subsequently founded and implicitly supported the los extraditable organization, which aims to fight extradition policy. the los extraditable organization was subsequently accused of participating in an effort to prevent the colombian supreme court from studying the constitutionality of colombias extradition treaty with the united states. in support of the  november , farleft guerrilla movement that attacked the colombian judiciary building and killed half of the justices of the supreme court. in late , colombias supreme court declared the previous extradition treaty illegal due to being signed by a presidential delegation, not the president. escobars victory over the judiciary was shortlived, with new president virgilio barco vargas having quickly renewed his agreement with the united states.escobar still held a grudge against luis carlos galn for kicking him out of politics, so galn was assassinated on  august  at escobars orders. escobar then planted a bomb on avianca flight  in an attempt to assassinate galns successor, csar gaviria trujillo, who missed the plane and survived. all  people were killed in the blast. because two americans were also killed in the bombing, the u.s. government began to intervene directly.

after the assassination of luis carlos galn, the administration of csar gaviria moved against escobar and the drug cartels. eventually, the government negotiated with escobar and convinced him to surrender and cease all criminal activity in exchange for a reduced sentence and preferential treatment during his captivity. declaring an end to a series of previous violent acts meant to pressure authorities and public opinion, escobar surrendered to colombian authorities in . before he gave himself up, the extradition of colombian citizens to the united states had been prohibited by the newly approved colombian constitution of . this act was controversial, as it was suspected that escobar and other drug lords had influenced members of the constituent assembly in passing the law. escobar was confined in what became his own luxurious private prison, la catedral, which featured a football pitch, a giant dollhouse, a bar, a jacuzzi, and a waterfall. accounts of escobars continued criminal activities while in prison began to surface in the media, which prompted the government to attempt to move him to a more conventional jail on  july . escobars influence allowed him to discover the plan in advance and make a successful escape, spending the remainder of his life evading the police.

escobar faced threats from the colombian police, the u.s. government and his rival, the cali cartel. on  december , escobar was found in a house in a middleclass residential area of medellin by colombian special forces using technology provided by the united states. police tried to arrest escobar, but the situation quickly escalated to an exchange of gun fire. escobar was shot and killed while trying to escape from the roof. he was hit by bullets in the torso and feet, and a bullet which struck him in the head, killing him. this sparked debate about whether he killed himself or whether he was shot dead.

soon after escobars death and the subsequent fragmentation of the medelln cartel, the cocaine market became dominated by the rival cali cartel until the mids when its leaders were either killed or captured by the colombian government. the robin hood image that escobar had cultivated maintained a lasting influence in medelln. many there, especially many of the citys poor whom escobar had aided while he was alive, mourned his death, and over , people attended his funeral. some of them consider him a saint and pray to him for receiving divine help. escobar was buried at the monte sacro cemetery.

on  july , virginia vallejo, a television anchorwoman romantically involved with escobar from  to , offered attorney general mario iguarn her testimony in the trial against former senator alberto santofimio, who was accused of conspiracy in the  assassination of presidential candidate luis carlos galn. iguarn acknowledged that, although vallejo had contacted his office on  july, the judge had decided to close the trial on  july, several weeks before the prospective closing date. the action was seen as too late.on  july , vallejo was taken to the united states on a special flight of the drug enforcement administration , for safety and security reasons due to her cooperation in highprofile criminal cases. on  july, a video in which vallejo had accused santofimio of instigating escobar to eliminate presidential candidate galn was aired by rcn television of colombia. the video was seen by  million people, and was instrumental for the reopened case of galns assassination. on  august  santofimio was sentenced to  years in prison for his role in the crime.

among escobars biographers, only vallejo has given a detailed explanation of his role in the  palace of justice siege. the journalist stated that escobar had financed the operation, which was committed by m; but she blamed the army for the killings of more than  people, including  supreme court magistrates, m members, and employees of the cafeteria. her statements prompted the reopening of the case in ; vallejo was asked to testify, and many of the events she had described in her book and testimonial were confirmed by colombias commission of truth. these events led to further investigation into the siege that resulted with the conviction of a highranking former colonel and a former general, later sentenced to  and  years in prison, respectively, for the forced disappearance of the detained after the siege. vallejo would subsequently testify in galns assassination. in her book, amando a pablo, odiando a escobar , she had accused several politicians, including colombian presidents alfonso lpez michelsen, ernesto samper and lvaro uribe of having links to drug cartels.

escobars widow , son  and daughter  fled colombia in  after failing to find a country that would grant them asylum. despite escobars numerous and continual infidelities, maria remained supportive of her husband. members of the cali cartel even replayed their recordings of her conversations with pablo for their wives to demonstrate how a woman should behave. this attitude proved to be the reason the cartel did not kill her and her children after pablos death, although the group demanded  millions of dollars in reparations for escobars war against them. henao even successfully negotiated for her sons life by personally guaranteeing he would not seek revenge against the cartel or participate in the drug trade.

after escaping first to mozambique, then to brazil, the family settled in argentina. living under her assumed name, henao became a successful real estate entrepreneur until one of her business associates discovered her true identity, and henao absconded with her earnings. local media were alerted, and after being exposed as escobars widow, henao was imprisoned for eighteen months while her finances were investigated. ultimately, authorities were unable to link her funds to illegal activity, and she was released. according to her son, henao fell in love with escobar because of his naughty smile and the way he looked at her. he was affectionate and sweet. a great lover. i fell in love with his desire to help people and his compassion for their hardship. we would drive to places where he dreamed of building schools for the poor. from the beginning, he was always a gentleman. mara victoria henao de escobar, with her new identity as mara isabel santos caballero, continues to live in buenos aires with her son and daughter. on  june , the argentine federal judge nestor barral accused her and her son, sebastin marroqun santos, of money laundering with two colombian drug traffickers. the judge ordered the seizing of assets for about m each.argentinian filmmaker nicolas entels documentary sins of my father  chronicles marroquns efforts to seek forgiveness, on behalf of his father, from the sons of rodrigo lara, colombias justice minister who was assassinated in , as well as from the sons of luis carlos galn, the presidential candidate who was assassinated in . the film was shown at the  sundance film festival and premiered in the us on hbo in october . in , marroqun published pablo escobar, my father under his birth name. the book provides a firsthand insight into details of his fathers life and describes the fundamentally disintegrating effect of his death upon the family. marroqun aimed to publish the book in hopes to resolve any inaccuracies regarding his fathers excursions during the s.escobars sister, luz maria escobar, also made multiple gestures in attempts to make amends for the drug barons crimes. these include making public statements in the press, leaving letters on the graves of his victims and on the th anniversary of his death organizing a public memorial for his victims. escobars body was exhumed on  october  at the request of some of his relatives in order to take a dna sample to confirm the alleged paternity of an illegitimate child and remove all doubt about the identity of the body that had been buried next to his parents for  years. a video of the exhumation was broadcast by rcn, angering marroqun, who accused his uncle, roberto escobar, and cousin, nicolas escobar, of being merchants of death by allowing the video to air.

after escobars death, the ranch, zoo and citadel at hacienda npoles were given by the government to lowincome families under a law called extincin de dominio . the property has been converted into a theme park surrounded by four luxury hotels overlooking the zoo.

in , roberto escobar founded escobar inc with olof k. gustafsson and registered successorininterest rights for his brother pablo escobar in california, united states.

escobar kept four hippos in a private menagerie at hacienda npoles. they were deemed too difficult to seize and move after escobars death, and hence left on the untended estate. by , the animals had multiplied to  and had taken to roaming the area for food in the nearby magdalena river. in , two adults and one calf escaped the herd and, after attacking humans and killing cattle, one of the adults  was killed by hunters under authorization of the local authorities. as of early ,  hippos have been reported to exist in puerto triunfo, antioquia department, from the original four belonging to escobar. without management the population size is likely to more than double in the next decade.the national geographic channel produced a documentary about them titled cocaine hippos. a report published in a yale student magazine noted that local environmentalists are campaigning to protect the animals, although there is no clear plan for what will happen to them. in , national geographic published another article on the hippos which found disagreement among environmentalists on whether they were having a positive or negative impact, but that conservationists and locals  particularly those in the tourism industry  were mostly in support of their continued presence.by october , the colombian government had started a program of chemically sterilizing the animals.

on  february , at  am local time, medelln authorities demolished the sixstory edificio mnaco apartment complex in the el poblado neighborhood where, according to retired colombian general rosso jos serrano, escobar planned some of his most brazen attacks. the building was initially built for escobars wife but was gutted by a cali cartel car bomb in  and had remained unoccupied ever since, becoming an attraction to foreign tourists seeking out escobars physical legacy. mayor federico gutierrez had been pushing to raze the building and erect in its place a park honoring the thousands of cartel victims, including four presidential candidates and some  police officers. colombian president ivan duque said the demolition means that history is not going to be written in terms of the perpetrators, but by recognizing the victims, hoping the demolition would showcase that the city had evolved significantly and had more to offer than the legacy left by the cartels.

in march , the yearold escobar married mara victoria henao, who was . the relationship was discouraged by the henao family, who considered escobar socially inferior; the pair eloped. they had two children juan pablo  and manuela.

in , the journalist virginia vallejo published her memoir amando a pablo, odiando a escobar , in which she describes her romantic relationship with escobar and the links of her lover with several presidents, caribbean dictators, and highprofile politicians. her book inspired the movie loving pablo .a drug distributor, griselda blanco, is also reported to have conducted a clandestine, but passionate, relationship with escobar; several items in her diary link him with the nicknames coque de mi rey  and polla blanca .

after becoming wealthy, escobar created or bought numerous residences and safe houses, with the hacienda npoles gaining significant notoriety. the luxury house contained a colonial house, a sculpture park, and a complete zoo with animals from various continents, including elephants, exotic birds, giraffes, and hippopotamuses. escobar had also planned to construct a greekstyle citadel near it, and though construction of the citadel was started, it was never finished.escobar also owned a home in the us under his own name a , square foot , pink, waterfront mansion situated at  north bay road in miami beach, florida. the fourbedroom estate, built in  on biscayne bay, was seized by the us federal government in the s. later, the dilapidated property was owned by christian de berdouare, proprietor of the chicken kitchen fastfood chain, who had bought it in . de berdouare would later hire a documentary film crew and professional treasure hunters to search the edifice before and after demolition, for anything related to escobar or his cartel. they would find unusual holes in floors and walls, as well as a safe that was stolen from its hole in the marble flooring before it could be properly examined.escobar also owned a huge caribbean getaway on isla grande, the largest of the cluster of the  coral cluster islands comprising islas del rosario, located about  km  from cartagena. the compound, now halfdemolished and overtaken by vegetation and wild animals, featured a mansion, apartments, courtyards, a large swimming pool, a helicopter landing pad, reinforced windows, tiled floors, and a large but unfinished building to the side of the mansion.

escobar has been the subject of several books, including the following

escobar , by roberto escobar, written by his brother shows how he became infamous and ultimately died.

escobar gaviria, roberto . my brother  pablo escobar. escobar, inc. isbn .

kings of cocaine , by guy gugliotta, retells the history and operations of the medelln cartel, and escobars role within it.

killing pablo the hunt for the worlds greatest outlaw , by mark bowden, relates how escobar was killed and his cartel dismantled by us special forces and intelligence, the colombian military, and los pepes.

pablo escobar my father , by juan pablo escobar, translated by andrea rosenberg.

pablo escobar beyond narcos , by shaun attwood, tells the story of pablo and the medellin cartel in the context of the failed war on drugs; isbn 

american made who killed barry seal pablo escobar or george hw bush , by shaun attwood, tells pablos story as a suspect in the murder of cia pilot barry seal; isbn 

loving pablo, hating escobar  by virginia vallejo, originally published by penguin random house in spanish in , and later translated to  languages.

news of a kidnapping,  nonfiction  book by gabriel garca mrquez, and published in english in .

two major feature films on escobar, escobar  and killing pablo , were announced in . details about them, and additional films about escobar, are listed below.

blow, a  american biographical film based on george jung, a member of the medelln cartel; escobar was portrayed by cliff curtis.

pablo escobar the king of coke  is a tv movie documentary by national geographic, featuring archival footage and commentary by stakeholders.

escobar  was delayed because of producer oliver stones involvement with the george w. bush biopic w. . as of , the release date of escobar remained unconfirmed. regarding the film, stone said this is a great project about a fascinating man who took on the system. i think i have to thank scarface, and maybe even ari gold.

killing pablo  was supposedly in development for several years, directed by joe carnahan. it was to be based on mark bowdens  book of the same title, which in turn was based on his part philadelphia inquirer series of articles on the subject. the cast was reported to include christian bale as major steve jacoby and venezuelan actor dgar ramrez as escobar. in december , bob yari, producer of killing pablo, filed for bankruptcy.

escobar paradise lost  a romantic thriller in which a naive canadian surfer falls in love with a girl who turns out to be escobars niece.

loving pablo , spanish film based on virginia vallejos book loving pablo, hating escobar with javier bardem as escobar, and penlope cruz as virginia vallejo.

american made , american biographical film based on barry seal; escobar was portrayed by mauricio meja.

weird the al yankovic story , american biopic parody loosely based on the life of weird al yankovic; arturo castro portrays escobar who is depicted as a weird al fan who kidnaps weird als girlfriend, madonna, to lure him to play at his fortieth birthday party. weird al instead murders him.

in , court tv  crime documentary series mugshots released an episode on escobar titled pablo escobar  hunting the druglord.

in the  hbo television series, entourage, actor vincent chase  is cast as escobar in a fictional film entitled medelln.

one of espns  for  series films, the two escobars , by directors jeff and michael zimbalist, looks back at colombias world cup run in  and the relationship between sports and the countrys criminal gangs  notably the medelln narcotics cartel run by escobar. the other escobar in the film title refers to former colombian defender andrs escobar , who was shot and killed one month after conceding an own goal that contributed to the elimination of the colombian national team from the  fifa world cup.

caracol tv produced a television series, el cartel , which began airing on  june  where escobar is portrayed by an unknown model when he is shot down by cartel del surs hitmen.

also caracol tv produced a tv series, pablo escobar el patrn del mal , which began airing on  may , and stars andrs parra as pablo escobar. it is based on alonso salazars book la parbola de pablo. parra reprises his role in tv series football dreams, a world of passion and el seor de los cielos . parra has declared not to play the character again so as not to typecast himself.

rti producciones produced a tv series for rcn televisin, tres canes, was released on  march , which escobar is portrayed by the colombian actor juan pablo franco  in the first phase of the series. franco reprises his role in surviving escobar alias jj.

the same year , fox telecolombia produced for rcn televisin a tv series, alias el mexicano, released on  november , which escobar is portrayed by an unknown actor in a minor role.

a netflix original television series depicting the story of escobar, titled narcos, was released on  august , starring brazilian actor wagner moura as pablo. season two premiered on the streaming service on  september .

in , teleset and sony pictures television produced for rcn televisin the tv series en la boca del lobo, was released on  august , which escobar is portrayed by fabio restrepo  as the character of flavio escolar.

national geographic in  broadcast a biography series facing that included an episode featuring escobar.

on  january , netflix released the minutelong documentary countdown to death pablo escobar directed by santiago diaz and pablo martin farina.

killing escobar was a documentary televised in the uk in . it concerned a failed attempt by mercenaries, contracted by the cali cartel and led by peter mcaleese, to assassinate escobar in .

fox telecolombia produced in  a tv series, el general naranjo, which aired on  may , which escobar is portrayed by the colombian actor federico rivera.

the  song pablo by american rapper e serves as an ode to the legacy of pablo escobar.

the  album the life of pablo by american rapper kanye west was named after the three pablos who inspired and represented some part of the album, with one of them being pablo escobar.

dubdogzs pablo escobar , released in , has garnered more than . million views for its official music video.

the  hit single narcos by the atlanta based rap group migos from their album culture ii makes references to pablo escobar as well as the medellin cartel, and the netflix series narcos

